learning objectives  1.1  How do we define abnormality and classify mental disorders?  1.2  What are the advantages and disadvantages of classification?  1.3  How common are mental disorders? Which disorders are most prevalent?  1.4  Why do we need a research-based approach in abnormal psychology?  1.5  How do we gather information about mental disorders?  1.6  What kinds of research designs are used to conduct research in abnormal psychology?  Abnormal psychology   is concerned with understanding the nature, causes, and treatment of mental disorders. The topics and problems within the field of abnormal psychology surround us every day. You have only to pick up a newspaper, flip through a magazine, surf the web, or sit through a movie to be exposed to some of the issues that clinicians and researchers deal with on a day-to-day basis. Almost weekly some celebrity is in the news because of a drug or alcohol problem, an eating disorder, or some other psychological difficulty. Countless books provide personal accounts of struggles with schizo- phrenia, depression, phobias, and panic attacks. Films and TV shows portray aspects of abnormal behavior with varying degrees of accuracy. And then there are the tragic news stories of mothers who kill their children, in which problems with depression, schizophre- nia, or postpartum difficulties seem to be implicated. Abnormal psychology can also be found much closer to home. Walk around any college campus, and you will see fly- ers about peer support groups for people with eating disorders, depression, and a variety of other disturbances. You may even know someone who has experienced a clinical problem. It may be a cousin with a cocaine habit, a roommate with bulimia, or a grandparent who is developing Alzheimer’s disease. It may be a coworker of your mother’s who is hospitalized for depression, a neighbor who is afraid to leave the house, or someone at your gym who works out intensely despite being worrisomely thin. It may even be the disheveled street person in the aluminum foil hat who shouts, “Leave me alone!” to voices only he can hear. The issues of abnormal psychology capture our inter- est, demand our attention, and trigger our concern. They also compel us to ask questions. To illustrate further, let’s consider two clinical cases.  Monique   Monique is a 24-year-old law student. She is attractive, neatly dressed, and clearly very bright. If you were to meet her, you would think that she had few problems in her life; but Monique has been drinking alcohol since she was 14, and she smokes marijuana every day. Although she describes herself as “just a social drinker,” she drinks four or five glasses of wine when she goes out with friends and also drinks a couple of glasses of wine a night when she is alone in her apartment in the evening. She frequently misses early-morning classes because she feels too hung over to get out of bed. On several occasions her drinking has caused her to black out. Although she denies having any prob- lems with alcohol, Monique admits that her friends and family have become very concerned about her and have suggested that she seek help. Monique, however, says, “I don’t think I am an alco- holic because I never drink in the mornings.” The previous week she decided to stop smoking marijuana entirely because she was concerned that she might have a drug problem. However, she found it impossible to stop and is now smoking regularly again.  John   John comes from a family with no history of mental illness. He had a normal birth and seemed to develop normally when he was a child. However, when he was 21, John began to hear voices and started to believe that there was a conspiracy against him. Since that time, he has been on various different anti- psychotic medications. Although these have helped a little, he still has symptoms of psychosis. Now aged 46, John has been unable to work since he became ill. He has also been hospitalized many times. John lives in sheltered accommodation, although he main- tains contact with his parents and his older brother.  Perhaps you found yourself asking questions as you read about Monique and John. For example, because Monique doesn’t drink in the mornings, you might have wondered whether she could really have a serious alcohol problem. She does. This is a question that concerns the criteria that must be met before some- one receives a particular diagnosis. Or perhaps you wondered whether other people in Monique’s family likewise have drinking problems. They do. This is a question about what we call   family aggregation —that is, whether a disorder runs in families. You may also have been curious about what is wrong with John and why he is hearing voices. Questions about the age of onset of his symptoms as well as predisposing factors may also have occurred to you. John has schizophrenia, a disorder that often strikes in late adolescence or early adulthood. Also, as  1
John’s case illustrates, it is not unusual for someone who develops schizophrenia to develop perfectly normally before suddenly be- coming ill. You can read more about John’s case and treatment in Valmaggia and colleagues (2008). These cases, which describe real people, give some indication of just how profoundly lives can be derailed because of mental disor- ders. It is hard to read about difficulties such as these without feeling compassion for the people who are struggling. Still, in addition to compassion, clinicians and researchers who want to help people like Monique and John must have other attributes and skills. If we are to understand mental disorders, we must learn to ask the kinds of ques- tions that will enable us to help the patients and families who have mental disorders. These questions are at the very heart of a research- based approach that looks to use scientific inquiry and careful obser- vation to understand abnormal psychology. Asking questions is an important aspect of being a psycholo- gist. Psychology is a fascinating field, and abnormal psychology is one of the most interesting areas of psychology (although we are undoubtedly biased). Psychologists are trained to ask questions and to conduct research. Though not all people who are trained in abnormal psychology (this field is sometimes called psy- chopathology) conduct research, they still rely heavily on their scientific skills and ability both to ask questions and to put infor- mation together in coherent and logical ways. For example, when a clinician first sees a new client or patient, he or she asks many questions to try and understand the issues or problems related to that person. The clinician will also rely on current research to choose the most effective treatment. The best treatments of 20, 10, or even 5 years ago are not invariably the best treatments of today. Knowledge accumulates and advances are made. And re- search is the engine that drives all of these developments. In this chapter, we will outline the field of abnormal psy- chology and the varied training and activities of the people who work within its demands. First we describe the ways in which ab- normal behavior is defined and classified so that researchers and mental health professionals can communicate with each other about the people they see. Some of the issues here are probably more complex and controversial than you might expect. We also outline basic information about the extent of behavioral abnor- malities in the population at large. You will notice that a large section of this chapter is devoted to research. We make every effort to convey how abnormal behav- ior is studied. Research is at the heart of progress and knowledge in abnormal psychology. The more you know and understand about how research is conducted, the more educated and aware you will be about what research findings do and do not mean.  What Do We Mean by Abnormality?  It may come as a surprise to you that there is still no universal agreement about what is meant by   abnormality   or   disorder . This is not to say we do not have definitions; we do. However, a truly satisfactory definition will probably always remain elusive (Lilienfeld & Landfield, 2008; Stein et al., 2010) even though there is a great deal of general agreement about which conditions are disorders and which are not (Spitzer, 1999). Why does the definition of a mental disorder present so many challenges? A major problem is that there is no one behavior that makes someone abnormal. However, there are some clear elements or indicators of abnormality (Lilienfeld & Marino, 1999; Stein et al., 2010). No single indicator is sufficient in and of itself to define or determine abnormality. Nonetheless, the more that someone has difficulties in the following areas, the more likely he or she is to have some form of mental disorder. 1.   Suffering:   If people suffer or experience psychological pain we are inclined to consider this as indicative of abnormality. Depressed people clearly suffer, as do people with anxiety dis- orders. But what of the patient who is manic and whose mood is one of elation? He or she may not be suffering. In fact, many such patients dislike taking medications because they do not want to lose their manic “highs.” You may have a test tomor- row and be suffering with worry. But we would hardly label your suffering abnormal. Although suffering is an element of abnormality in many cases, it is neither a sufficient condition (all that is needed) nor even a necessary condition (a feature that all cases of abnormality must show) for us to consider something as abnormal. 2.   Maladaptiveness:   Maladaptive behavior is often an indica- tor of abnormality. The person with anorexia may restrict her intake of food to the point where she becomes so emaciated  Fergie has spoken about her past struggles with substance abuse, specifically crystal meth.
that she needs to be hospitalized. The person with depression may withdraw from friends and family and may be unable to work for weeks or months. Maladaptive behavior interferes with our well-being and with our ability to enjoy our work and our relationships. However, not all disorders involve mal- adaptive behavior. Consider the con artist and the contract killer, both of whom have antisocial personality disorder. The first may be able glibly to talk people out of their life savings, the second to take someone’s life in return for payment. Is this behavior maladaptive? Not for them, because it is the way in which they make their respective livings. We consider them abnormal, however, because their behavior is maladap- tive for and toward society. 3.   Statistical Deviancy:   The word   abnormal   literally means “away from the normal.” But simply considering statistical- ly rare behavior to be abnormal does not provide us with a solution to our problem of defining abnormality. Genius is statistically rare, as is perfect pitch. However, we do not con- sider people with such uncommon talents to be abnormal in any way. Also, just because something is statistically common doesn’t make it normal. The common cold is certainly very common, but it is regarded as an illness nonetheless. On the other hand, intellectual disability (which is statis- tically rare and represents a deviation from normal) is con- sidered to reflect abnormality. This tells us that in defining abnormality we make value judgments. If something is statis- tically rare and undesirable (as is severely diminished intellec- tual functioning), we are more likely to consider it abnormal than something that is statistically rare and highly desirable (such as genius) or something that is undesirable but statisti- cally common (such as rudeness). 4.   Violation of the Standards of Society:   All cultures have rules. Some of these are formalized as laws. Others form the norms and moral standards that we are taught to follow. Although many social rules are arbitrary to some extent, when people fail to follow the conventional social and moral rules of their cultural group we may consider their behavior abnormal. For example, driving a car or watching television would be considered highly abnormal for the Amish of Pennsylvania. However, both of these activities reflect normal everyday be- havior for most other Pennsylvania residents. Of course, much depends on the magnitude of the viola- tion and on how commonly the rule is violated by others. As illustrated in the example above, a behavior is most likely to be viewed as abnormal when it violates the standards of society and is statistically deviant or rare. In contrast, most of us have parked illegally at some point. This failure to follow the rules is so statistically common that we tend not to think of it as ab- normal. Yet when a mother drowns her children there is instant recognition that this is abnormal behavior. 5.   Social Discomfort:   When someone violates a social rule, those around him or her may experience a sense of discom- fort or unease. Imagine that you are sitting in an almost empty movie theater. There are rows and rows of unoccupied seats. Then someone comes in and sits down right next to you. How do you feel? In a similar vein, how do you feel when someone you met only 4 minutes ago begins to chat about her suicide attempt? Unless you are a therapist working in a crisis intervention center, you would probably consider this an example of abnormal behavior. 6.   Irrationality and Unpredictability:   As we have already noted, we expect people to behave in certain ways. Although a little unconventionality may add some spice to life, there is a point at which we are likely to consider a given unorthodox behav- ior abnormal. If a person sitting next to you suddenly began to scream and yell obscenities at nothing, you would probably regard that behavior as abnormal. It would be unpredictable, and it would make no sense to you. The disordered speech and the disorganized behavior of patients with schizophrenia are often irrational. Such behaviors are also a hallmark of the manic phases of bipolar disorder. Perhaps the most impor- tant factor, however, is our evaluation of whether the person can control his or her behavior. Few of us would consider a roommate who began to recite speeches from King Lear to be abnormal if we knew that he was playing Lear in the next cam- pus Shakespeare production—or even if he was a dramatic person given to extravagant outbursts. On the other hand, if we discovered our roommate lying on the floor, flailing wildly, and reciting Shakespeare, we might consider calling for assis- tance if this was entirely out of character and we knew of no reason why he should be behaving in such a manner. 7.   Dangerousness:   It seems quite reasonable to think that some- one who is a danger to him- or herself or to another person must be psychologically abnormal. Indeed, therapists are re- quired to hospitalize suicidal clients or contact the police (as well as the person who is the target of the threat) if they have a client who makes an explicit threat to harm another person.  As with most accomplished athletes, Venus and Serena Williams’ physical ability is abnormal in a literal and statistical sense. Their behavior, however, would not be labeled as being abnormal by psychologists. Why not?
How important is dangerousness to the definition of mental illness? If we are a risk to ourselves or to others, does this mean we are mentally ill? Tattoos, which were once regarded as highly deviant, are now quite commonplace and considered fashionable by many.  But, as with all of the other elements of abnormality, if we rely only on dangerousness as our sole feature of abnormality, we will run into problems. Is a soldier in combat mentally ill? What about someone who is an extremely bad driver? Both of these people may be a danger to others. Yet we would not consider them to be mentally ill. Why not? And why is some- one who engages in extreme sports or who has a dangerous hobby (such as free diving, race car driving, or keeping poi- sonous snakes as pets) not immediately regarded as mentally ill? Just because we may be a danger to ourselves or to others does not mean we are mentally ill. Conversely, we cannot as- sume that someone diagnosed with a mental disorder must be dangerous. Although mentally ill people do commit serious crimes, serious crimes are also committed every day by people who have no signs of mental disorder. Indeed, research sug- gests that in people with mental illness, dangerousness is more the exception than it is the rule (Corrigan & Watson, 2005). One final point bears repeating. Decisions about abnormal behavior always involve social judgments and are based on the values and expectations of society at large. This means that cul- ture plays a role in determining what is and is not abnormal. For example, in the United States, people do not believe that it is acceptable to murder a woman who has a premarital or an extra- marital relationship. However,   karo-kari   (a form of honor killing where a woman is murdered by a male relative because she is considered to have brought disgrace onto her family) is considered justifiable by many people in Pakistan (Patel & Gadit, 2008). In addition, because society is constantly shifting and becom- ing more or less tolerant of certain behaviors, what is considered abnormal or deviant in one decade may not be considered abnor- mal or deviant a decade or two later. At one time, homosexuality was classified as a mental disorder. But this is no longer the case. A generation ago, pierced noses and navels were regarded as highly deviant and prompted questions about a person’s mental health. Now, however, such adornments are commonplace, considered fashionable by many, and attract little attention. What other behaviors can you think of that are now considered normal but were regarded as deviant in the past? As you think about these issues, consider the person described in The World Around Us box on page 6. Is he a courageous man of profound moral commitment? Or is his behavior abnormal and indicative of a mental disorder? Do others share your view about him?  The   DSM-5   and the Definition of Mental Disorder  In the United States, the accepted standard for defining various types of mental disorders is the American Psychiatric Associa- tion’s   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . This manual, commonly referred to as the   DSM , is revised and updated from time to time. The current version, called   DSM-5 , was published in 2013. Its revision has been a topic of much debate and controversy. In the box on page 7 we explain more about the   DSM   and discuss why a revision was necessary.
the World around us  Extreme Generosity or Pathological Behavior?  Z ell Kravinsky was a brilliant student who grew up in a working-class neighborhood in Philadelphia. He won prizes at school, and at the age of 12, he began investing in the stock market. Despite his abilities, his Russian immigrant parents were, in the words of a family friend, “steadfast in denying him any praise.” Kravinsky eventually completed two Ph.D. degrees and indulged his growing interest in real estate. By the time he was 45 years old, he was married with children. His assets amounted to almost $45 million. Although Kravinsky had a talent for making money, he found it difficult to spend it. He drove an old car, did not give his children pocket money, and lived with his family in a modest home. As his fortune grew, however, he began to talk to his friends about his plans to give all of his assets to charity. His philanthropy began in earnest when he and his wife gave two gifts, totaling $6.2 million, to the Centers for Disease Control Foundation. They also donated an apartment building to a school for the disabled in Philadelphia. The following year the Kravinskys gave real estate gifts worth approximately $30 million to Ohio State University. Kravinsky’s motivation for his donations was to help others. According to one of his friends, “He gave away the money because he had it and there were people who needed it. But it changed his way of looking at himself. He decided the purpose of his life was to give away things.” After he had put some money aside in trust for his wife and his children, Kravinsky’s personal assets were reduced to a house (on which he had a substantial mortgage), two minivans, and around $80,000 in stocks and cash. He had essentially given away his entire fortune. Kravinsky’s donations did not end when his financial assets be- came depleted. He began to be preoccupied with the idea of nondirected organ donations, in which an altruistic person gives an organ to a total stranger. When he learned that he could live quite normally with only one kidney, Kravinsky decided that the personal costs of giving away one of his kidneys were minimal compared to the benefits received by the kidney recipient. His wife, however, did not share his view. Although she had consented to bequeathing substantial sums of money to worth- while charities, when it came to her husband offering his kidney, she could not support him. For Kravinsky, however, the burden of refusing to help alleviate the suffering of someone in need was almost unbearable, even if it meant sacrificing his very own organs. He called the Albert Einstein Medical Center and spoke to a transplant coordinator. He met with a surgeon and then with a psychiatrist. Kravinsky told the psychiatrist that his wife did not support his desire to donate one of his kidneys. When the psychiatrist told him that he was doing something he did not have to do, Kravinsky’s response was that he did need to make this sacrifice: “You’re missing the whole point. It’s as much a necessity as food, water, and air.” Three months later, Kravinsky left his home in the early hours of the morning, drove to the hospital, and donated his right kidney. He informed his wife after the surgery was over. In spite of the turmoil that his kidney donation created within his family, Kravinsky’s mind turned back to philanthropy almost immedi- ately. “I lay there in the hospital, and I thought about all my other good organs. When I do something good, I feel that I can do more. I burn to do more. It’s a heady feeling.” By the time he was discharged, he was wondering about giving away his one remaining kidney. After the operation, Kravinsky experienced a loss of direction. He had come to view his life as a continuing donation. However, now that his financial assets and his kidney were gone, what could he provide to the less fortunate? Sometimes he imagines offering his entire body for donation. “My organs could save several people if I gave my whole body away.” He acknowledges that he feels un- able to hurt his family through the sacrifice of his life. Several years after the kidney donation, Kravinsky still remains committed to giving away as much as possible. However, his actions have caused a tremendous strain in his marriage. In an effort to maintain a harmonious relationship with his wife, he is now involved in real estate and has recently bought his family a larger home. (Taken from Parker, 2004.)  Is Zell Kravinsky’s behavior abnormal, or is he a man with profound moral conviction and courage?
Within   DSM-5 , a mental disorder is defined as a syndrome that is present in an individual and that involves clinically signif- icant disturbance in behavior, emotion regulation, or cognitive functioning. These disturbances are thought to reflect a dysfunc- tion in biological, psychological, or developmental processes that are necessary for mental functioning.   DSM-5   also recognizes that mental disorders are usually associated with significant distress or disability in key areas of functioning such as social, occupational or other activities. Predictable or culturally approved responses to common stressors or losses (such as death of a loved one) are excluded. It is also important that this dysfunctional pattern of behavior not stem from social deviance or conflicts that the per- son has with society as a whole. This new   DSM-5   definition of mental illness was based on input from various   DSM-5   workgroups as well as other sources (Broome & Bortolotti, 2010; First & Wakefield, 2010; Stein et al., 2010). Although this definition will still not satisfy everyone, it brings us ever closer to a good working descrip- tion. Keep in mind that any definition of abnormality or men- tal disorder must be somewhat arbitrary. Rather than thinking of the   DSM   as a finished product, it should always be regarded as a work in progress and regular updates and modifications are to be expected. Although earlier versions of the   DSM   used Roman numerals to refer to each specific edition (e.g.,   DSM- IV ), Arabic numerals are now being used instead of Roman numerals (5 versus V) to facilitate updating (e.g.,   DSM -5.1,  DSM -5.2) in the future.  Why Do We Need to Classify Mental Disorders?  If defining abnormality is so contentious and so difficult, why do we try to do it? One simple reason is that most sciences rely on classification (e.g., the periodic table in chemistry and the classification of living organisms into kingdoms, phyla, classes, and so on in biology). At the most fundamental level, clas- sification systems provide us with a   nomenclature   (a naming system) and enable us to   structure information   in a more help- ful manner. Organizing information within a classification system also allows us to study the different disorders that we classify and therefore to learn more about not only what causes them but also how they might best be treated. For example, thinking back to the cases you read about, Monique has alcohol and drug use disorders, and John has schizophrenia. Knowing what disorder each of them has is clearly very helpful, as John’s treatment would likely not work for Monique. A final effect of classification system usage is somewhat more mundane. As others have pointed out, the classification of mental disorders has social and political implications (see Blashfield & Livesley, 1999; Kirk & Kutchins, 1992). Simply put, defining the domain of what is considered to be pathologi- cal establishes the range of problems that the mental health profession can address. As a consequence, on a purely pragmatic level, it furthermore delineates which types of psychological dif- ficulties warrant insurance reimbursement and the extent of such reimbursement.  T he   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders  ( DSM ) provides all the information necessary (descrip- tions, lists of symptoms) to diagnose mental disorders. As such, it provides clinicians with specific diagnostic criteria for each disorder. This creates a common language so that a specific diagnosis means the same thing to one clinician as it does to another. This also helps ensure diagnostic accuracy and consistency (reliability).   DSM   is also important for research. If patients could not be diagnosed reliably it would be impossible to compare different treatments for patients with similar condi- tions. Although the   DSM   does not include information about treatment, clinicians need to have an accurate diagnosis in order to select the most appropriate treatment for their patients. Since   DSM-1   was first published in 1952, the   DSM   has been revised from time to time. Revisions are important because they allow new scientific developments to be incorporated into how we think about mental disorders. The revision process for   DSM-5  had the goals of maintaining continuity with the previous edi- tion ( DSM-IV ) as well as being guided by new research findings. But another guiding principle was that no constraints should be placed on the level of change that could be made. If this strikes you as a little contradictory, you are correct. Striking the right balance between change and continuity presented considerable challenges. It also created a great deal of controversy. As part of the revision process, experts in specific disorders were invited to join special   DSM-5   work groups and make specific recommen- dations for change. In some cases, the debates were so heated that people resigned from their work groups! Now that   DSM-5   is here, not everyone is happy with some of the changes that have been made. On the other hand, many of the revisions that have been made make a lot of sense. In the chapters that follow we highlight key changes in   DSM-5 . We also try to help you think critically about the reasons behind the specific modifications that were proposed and understand why they were accepted.  Thinking CriTiCally   about dSM-5  What Is the   DSM   and Why Was It Revised?   DSM- 5
What Are the Disadvantages of Classification?  Of course, there are a number of disadvantages in the usage of a discrete classification system. Classification, by its very nature, provides information in a shorthand form. However, using any form of shorthand inevitably leads to a   loss of infor- mation . If we know the specific history, personality traits, idiosyncrasies, and familial relations of a person with a partic- ular type of disorder (e.g., from reading a case summary), we naturally have much more information than if we were simply told the individual’s diagnosis (e.g., schizophrenia). In other words, as we simplify through classification, we inevitably lose an array of personal details about the actual person who has the disorder. Moreover, although things are improving, there can still be some   stigma   (or disgrace) associated with having a psychiatric diagnosis. Even today, people are generally far more comfort- able disclosing that they have a physical illness such as diabetes than they are in admitting to any mental disorder. This is in part due to the fear (real or imagined) that speaking candidly about having a psychological disorder will result in unwanted social or occupational consequences or frank discrimination. Be honest. Have you ever described someone as “nuts,” “crazy,” or “a psycho”? Now think of the hurt that people with mental disor- ders experience when they hear such words. In a recent study, 96 percent of patients with schizophrenia reported that stigma was a routine part of their lives (Jenkins & Carpenter-Song, 2008). In spite of the large amount of information that is now available about mental health issues, the level of knowledge about mental illness (sometimes referred to as mental health lit- eracy) is often very poor (Thornicroft et al., 2007). Related to stigma is the problem of   stereotyping . Stereo- types are automatic beliefs concerning other people that are based on minimal (often trivial) information (e.g., people who wear glasses are more intelligent; New Yorkers are rude; every- one in the South has a gun). Because we may have heard about certain behaviors that can accompany mental disorders, we may automatically and incorrectly infer that these behaviors will also be present in any person we meet who has a psychiatric diagnosis. This is reflected in the comment, “People like you don’t go back to work,” in the case example of James McNulty.  James McNulty   I have lived with bipolar disorder for more than 35 years—all of my adult life. The first 15 years were relatively conventional, at least on the surface. I graduated from an Ivy League university, started my own business, and began a career in local politics. I was married, the father of two sons. I experienced mood swings during these years, and as I got older the swings worsened. Eventually, I became so ill that I was unable to work, my marriage ended, I lost my business, and I became homeless. At this point I had my most powerful experience with stigma. I was 38 years old. I had recently been discharged after a psychiatric hospitalization for a suicide attempt, I had no place to live, my savings were exhausted, and my only possession was a 4-year-old car. I contacted the mental health authorities in the state where I then lived and asked for assistance in dealing with my mental illness. I was told that to qualify for assistance I would need to sell my car and spend down the proceeds. I asked how I was supposed to get to work when I recovered enough to find a job. I was told, “Don’t worry about going back to work. People like you don’t go back to work.” (McNulty, 2004)  Take a moment to consider honestly your own attitudes toward people with mental disorders. What assumptions do you tend to make? Do you view people with mental illness as less competent, more irresponsible, more dangerous, and more unpredictable? Research has shown that such attitudes are not uncommon (see A. C. Watson et al., 2004). Can you recall movies, novels, or advertisements that maintain such stereotypes? What are some ways in which you can challenge the false assumptions that are so common in the media? Do you think reality TV shows such as   Hoarders ,   Obsessed , or   My Strange Addiction   have a helpful or harmful impact on societal attitudes? Finally, stigma can be perpetuated by the problem of  labeling . A person’s self-concept may be directly affected by being given a diagnosis of schizophrenia, depression, or some other form of mental illness. How might you react if you were told something like this? Furthermore, once a group of symp- toms is given a name and identified by means of a diagnosis, this diagnostic label can be hard to shake even if the person later makes a full recovery. It is important to keep in mind, however, that diagnostic classification systems do not classify people. Rather,   they clas- sify the disorders that people have . When we note that someone has an illness, we should take care not to define him or her by that illness. Respectful and appropriate language should instead be used. At one time, it was quite common for mental health professionals to describe a given patient as “a schizophrenic” or “a manic-depressive.” Now, however, it is widely acknowledged that it is more accurate (not to mention more considerate) to say, “a person with schizophrenia,” or “a person with manic depression.” Simply put, the person is not the diagnosis.  How Can We Reduce Prejudicial Attitudes Toward the Mentally Ill?  For a long time, it was thought that educating people that mental illnesses were “real” brain disorders might be the solution. Sadly, however, this does not seem to be the case. Although there have been impressive increases in the propor- tion of people who now understand that mental disorders have neurobiological causes, this increased awareness has not resulted in decreases in stigma. In a recent study, Pescosolido and colleagues (2010) asked people in the community to read a vignette (brief description) about a person who showed symptoms of mental illness. Some people read a vignette about
a person who had schizophrenia. Others read a vignette about someone with clinical depression or alcohol dependence. Importantly, no diagnostic labels were used to describe these people. The vignettes simply provided descriptive information. Nonetheless, the majority of the people who were surveyed in this study expressed an unwillingness to work with the person described in the vignette. They also did not want to have to socialize with them and did not want them to marry into their family. Moreover, the level of rejection that was shown was just as high as it was in a similar survey that was done 10 years earlier. Over that same 10-year period, however, many more people embraced a neurobiological understand- ing about the causes of mental illness. So what this study tells us is that just because people understand that mental illness is caused by problems in the brain doesn’t mean that they are any less prejudiced toward those with mental illness. This is a disappointing conclusion for everyone who hoped that more scientific research into the biology of mental illness would lead to the elimination of stigma. Stigma does seem to be reduced by having more contact with people in the stigmatized group (Couture & Penn, 2003). However, there may be barriers to this. Simply imagining interacting with a person who has a mental disorder can lead to distress and also to unpleasant physical reactions. In an interesting study, Graves and colleagues (2005) asked college students enrolled in a psychology course to imagine interact- ing with a person whose image was shown to them on a slide. As the slide was being presented, subjects were given some scripted biographical information that described the person. In some scripts, the target person was described as having been diagnosed with schizophrenia, although it was also mentioned that he or she was “doing much better now.” In other trials, the biographical description made no mention of any men- tal illness when the person on the slide was being described.  the World around us  Mad, Sick, Head Nuh Good: Mental Illness and Stigma in Jamaica  E vidence suggests that negative reactions to the mentally ill may be a fairly widespread phenomenon. Using focus groups, Arthur and colleagues (2010) asked commu- nity residents in Jamaica about the concept of stigma. Some participants came from rural communities, others from more urban areas. Regardless of their gender, level of education, or where they lived, most participants described highly prejudicial attitudes toward the mentally ill. One middle-class male partici- pant said, “We treat them as in a sense second class citizens, we stay far away from them, ostracize them, we just treat them bad” (see Arthur et al., 2010, p. 263). Fear of the mentally ill was also commonly expressed. A rural-dwelling middle-class man described a specific situation in the following way, “There is a mad lady on the road named [. . .]. Even the police are afraid of her because she throws stones at them. She is very, very terrible” (p. 261). Moreover, even when more kindly at- titudes were expressed, fear was still a common response. One person put it simply, “You are fearful even though you may be sympathetic” (p. 262). The Jamaicans in this study also made a distinction between mental illness (a term used to denote less severe conditions) and madness, which was used to describe more severe prob- lems. Madness was invariably regarded as being a permanent condition (“once yuh mad yuh mad” or “once yuh gone yuh gone”). Moreover, homelessness was almost always taken to indicate madness. In short, the results of this study suggest that stereotyping, labeling, and stigma toward the mentally ill are not restricted to industrialized countries. Although we might wish that it were otherwise, prejudicial attitudes are common. This highlights the need for antistigma campaigns in Jamaica, as well as everywhere else in the world.  Are attitudes toward the mentally ill in Jamaica more be- nign than they are in more industrialized countries?
Students who took part in the study reported more distress and had more muscle tension in their brows when they imagined interacting with a person with schizophrenia than when they imagined interacting with a person who did not have schizo- phrenia. Heart rate changes also suggested they were experi- encing the imagined interactions with the patients as being more unpleasant than the interactions with the nonpatients. Finally, research participants who had more psychophysiologi- cal reactivity to the slides of the patients reported higher levels of stigma toward these patients. These findings suggest that people may tend to avoid those with mental illness because the psychophysiological arousal these encounters create is experienced as unpleasant.  How Does Culture Affect What Is Considered Abnormal?  Just as we must consider changing societal values and expecta- tions in defining abnormality, so too must we consider differ- ences across cultures. In fact, this is explicitly acknowledged in the   DSM-5   definition of   disorder.   Within a given culture, there exist many shared beliefs and behaviors that are widely accepted and that may constitute one or more customary practices. For instance, many people in Christian countries believe that the number 13 is unlucky. The origins of this may be linked to the Last Supper, at which 13 people were present. Many of us try to be especially cautious on Friday the 13th. Some hotels and apartment buildings avoid having a 13th floor altogether. Simi- larly, there is frequently no bed numbered 13 in hospital wards. The Japanese, in contrast, are not worried about the number 13. Rather, they attempt to avoid the number 4. This is because in Japanese the sound of the word for “four” is similar to the sound of the word for “death” (see Tseng, 2001, pp. 105–6). There is also considerable variation in the way different cultures describe psychological distress. For example, there is no word for “depressed” in the languages of certain Native Ameri- cans, Alaska Natives, and Southeast Asian cultures (Manson, 1995). Of course, this does not mean that members from such cultural groups do not experience clinically significant depres- sion. As the accompanying case illustrates, however, the way some disorders present themselves may depend on culturally sanctioned ways of articulating distress.  Depression in a Native American Elder   JGH is a 71-year-old member of a Southwestern tribe who has been brought to a local Indian Health Service hospital by one of his granddaughters and is seen in the general medical outpatient clinic for multiple complaints. Most of Mr. GH’s complaints involve nonlocalized pain. When asked to point to where he hurts, Mr. GH indicates his chest, then his abdomen, his knees, and finally moves his hands “all over.” Barely whispering, he mentions a phrase in his native language that translates as “whole body sickness.” His granddaughter notes that he “has not been himself” recently. Specifically, Mr. GH, during the past 3 or 4 months, has stopped attending or participating in many events previously important to him and central to his role in a large extended family and clan. He is reluctant to discuss this change in behavior as well as his feelings. When questioned more directly, Mr. GH acknowledges that he has had difficulty falling asleep, sleeps intermittently through the night, and almost always awakens at dawn’s first light. He admits that he has not felt like eating in recent months but denies weight loss, although his clothes hang loosely in many folds. Trouble concentrating and remembering are eventually disclosed as well. Asked why he has not participated in family and clan events in the last several months, Mr. GH describes himself as “too tired and full of pain” and “afraid of disappointing people.” Further pressing by the cli- nician is met with silence. Suddenly the patient states, “You know, my sheep haven’t been doing well lately. Their coats are ragged; they’re thinner. They just wander aimlessly; even the ewes don’t seem to care about the little ones.” Physical examina- tion and laboratory tests are normal. Mr. GH continues to take two tablets of acetaminophen daily for mild arthritic pain. Although he describes himself as a “recovering alcoholic,” Mr. GH reports not having consumed alcohol during the last 23 years. He denies any prior episodes of depression or other psychiatric problems. (Manson, 1995, p. 488)  There is no word for “depressed” in the languages of certain Native American tribes. Members of these communities tend to describe their symptoms of depression in physical rather than emotional terms.
Some African tribe members inflict painful and permanent scars (a process called scarification) on their faces and torsos in an effort to beautify themselves. Such a practice might be viewed as abnormal by Western European cultures, yet it is quite common among African tribes.  Some disorders are highly culture specific. For example,   taijin kyofusho  is a disorder that is prevalent in Japan. It is characterized by the fear that one may upset others by one’s gaze, facial expression, or body odor.  As is apparent in the case of JGH, culture can shape the clinical presentation of disorders like depression, which are present across cultures around the world (see Draguns & Tanaka-Matsumi, 2003). In China, for instance, individuals with depression frequently focus on physical concerns (fatigue, dizziness, headaches) rather than verbalizing their feelings of melancholy or hopelessness (Kleinman, 1986; Parker et al., 2001). This focus on physical pain rather than emotional pain is also noteworthy in Mr. GH’s case. Despite progressively increasing cultural awareness, we still know relatively little concerning cultural interpretation and expres- sion of abnormal psychology (Arrindell, 2003). The vast major- ity of the psychiatric literature originates from Euro-American countries—that is, Western Europe, North America, and Australia/ New Zealand (Patel & Kim, 2007; Patel & Sumathipala, 2001). To exacerbate this underrepresentation, research published in lan- guages other than English tends to be disregarded (Draguns, 2001).  Culture-Specific Disorders  Prejudice toward the mentally ill seems to be found worldwide (see The World Around Us box on p. 9). However, some types of psychopathology appear to be highly culture-specific: They are found only in certain areas of the world and seem to be highly linked to culturally bound concerns. A case in point is   taijin kyofusho . This syndrome, which is an anxiety disorder, is quite prevalent in Japan. It involves a marked fear that one’s body, body parts, or body functions may offend, embarrass, or oth- erwise make others feel uncomfortable. Often, people with this disorder are afraid of blushing or upsetting others by their gaze, facial expression, or body odor (Levine & Gaw, 1995). Another culturally rooted expression of distress, found in Latino and Latina individuals, especially those from the Caribbean, is   ataque de nervios   (Lizardi et al., 2009; Lopez & Guarnaccia, 2005). This is a clinical syndrome that does not seem to correspond to any specific diagnosis within the   DSM . The symptoms of an ataque de nervios, which is often triggered by a stressful event such as divorce or bereavement, include cry- ing, trembling, uncontrollable screaming, and a general feeling of loss of control. Sometimes the person may become physically or verbally aggressive. Alternately, the person may faint or expe- rience a seizure-like fit. Once the ataque is over, the person may promptly resume his or her normal manner, with little or no memory of the incident. As noted earlier, abnormal behavior is behavior that devi- ates from the norms of the society in which the person lives. Experiences such as hearing the voice of a dead relative might be regarded as normative in one culture (e.g., in many Native American tribes) yet abnormal in another cultural milieu. Nonetheless, certain unconventional actions and behaviors are almost universally considered to be the product of mental disorder. Many years ago, the anthropologist Jane Murphy (1976) studied abnormal behavior by the Yoruba of Africa and the Yupik- speaking Eskimos living on an island in the Bering Sea. Both societies had words that were used to denote abnormality or “cra- ziness.” In addition, the clusters of behaviors that were considered to reflect abnormality in these cultures were behaviors that most of us would also regard as abnormal. These included hearing voices, laughing at nothing, defecating in public, drinking urine, and believing things that no one else believes. Why do you think these behaviors are universally considered to be abnormal?
in review  •   Why is abnormality so difficult to define? What characteristics help us recognize abnormality?  •   What is stigma? How common is it? What are the challenges in reducing stigma toward the mentally ill?  •   In what ways can culture shape the clinical presentation of men- tal disorders?  How Common Are Mental Disorders?  How many and what sort of people have diagnosable psychologi- cal disorders today? This is a significant question for a number of reasons. First, such information is essential when planning and establishing mental health services. Mental health planners require a precise understanding of the nature and extent of the psychological difficulties within a given area, state, or country because they are responsible for determining how resources such as funding of research projects or services provided by commu- nity mental health centers may be most effectively allocated. It would obviously be imprudent to have a treatment center filled with clinicians skilled in the treatment of anorexia nervosa (a very severe but rare clinical problem) if there were few clini- cians skilled in treating anxiety or depression, which are much more prevalent disorders. Second, estimates of the frequency of mental disorders in dif- ferent groups of people may provide valuable clues as to the causes of these disorders. For example, data from the United Kingdom have shown that schizophrenia is about three times more likely to develop in ethnic minorities than in the white population (Kirk- bridge et al., 2006). Rates of schizophrenia in southeast London are also high relative to other parts of the country. This is prompt- ing researchers to explore why this might be. Possible factors may be social class and neighborhood deprivation, as well as diet or exposure to infections or environmental contaminants.  Prevalence and Incidence  Before we can further discuss the impact of mental disorders upon society, we must clarify the way in which psychological problems are counted.   Epidemiology   is the study of the dis- tribution of diseases, disorders, or health-related behaviors in a given population. Mental health epidemiology is the study of the distribution of mental disorders. A key component of an epide- miological survey is determining the frequencies of mental disor- ders. There are several ways of doing this. The term   prevalence  refers to the number of active cases in a population during any given period of time. Prevalence figures are typically expressed as percentages (i.e., the percentage of the population that has the disorder). Furthermore, there are several different types of preva- lence estimates that can be made.  Point prevalence   refers to the estimated proportion of actual, active cases of the disorder in a given population at a given point in time. For example, if we were to conduct a study and count the number of people who have major depressive disorder (i.e., clinical depression) on January 1st of next year, this would provide us with a point prevalence estimate of active cases of depression. A person who experienced depression during the months of November and December but who managed to recover by January 1st would not be included in our point preva- lence calculation. The same is true of someone whose depression did not begin until January 2nd. If, on the other hand, we wanted to calculate a   1-year prevalence   figure, we would count everyone who experienced depression at any point in time throughout the entire year. As you might imagine, this prevalence figure would be higher than the point prevalence figure because it would cover a much longer time. It would moreover include those people who had recovered before the point prevalence assessment as well as those whose disorders did not begin until after the point prevalence estimate was made. Finally, we may also wish to obtain an estimate of the num- ber of people who have had a particular disorder at any time in their lives (even if they are now recovered). This would provide us with a   lifetime prevalence   estimate. Because they extend over an entire lifetime and include both currently ill and recov- ered individuals, lifetime prevalence estimates tend to be higher than other kinds of prevalence estimates. An additional term with which you should be familiar is  incidence . This refers to the number of new cases that occur over a given period of time (typically 1 year). Incidence figures tend to be lower than prevalence figures because they exclude preexisting cases. In other words, if we were assessing the 1-year incidence of schizophrenia, we would not count people whose schizophrenia began before our given starting date (even if they were still ill) because they are not “new” cases of schizophrenia. On the other hand, someone who was quite well previously but then developed schizophrenia during our 1-year window would be included in our incidence estimate.  Prevalence Estimates for Mental Disorders  Now that you have an understanding of some basic terms, let’s turn to the 1-year prevalence rates for several important disor- ders. Three major national mental health epidemiology studies, with direct and formal diagnostic assessment of participants, have been carried out in the United States. One, the Epidemio- logic Catchment Area (ECA) study, focused on sampling citizens of five communities: Baltimore, New Haven, St. Louis, Durham (NC), and Los Angeles (Myers et al., 1984; Regier et al., 1988, 1993). The second, the National Comorbidity Survey (NCS), was more extensive. It sampled the entire American population using a number of sophisticated methodological improvements (Kes- sler et al., 1994). A replication of the NCS (the NCS-R) was completed about a decade later (Kessler et al., 2004; Kessler,
Berglund, Borges, et al., 2005a; Kessler & Merikangas, 2004). The most current 1-year and lifetime prevalence estimates of the  DSM-IV   mental disorders assessed from the NCS-R study are shown in Table 1.1. Because   DSM-5   is so new, no lifetime prevalence data using this revised version of the   DSM   are yet available. However, the lifetime prevalence of having any   DSM-IV   disorder is 46.4 per- cent. This means that almost half of the Americans who were questioned had been affected by mental illness at some point in their lives (Kessler, Berglund, Demler, et al., 2005b). Although this figure may seem high, it may actually be an underestimate, as the NCS study did not assess for eating disorders, schizophre- nia, or autism, for example. Neither did it include measures of most personality disorders. As you can see from Table 1.1, the most prevalent category of psychological disorders is anxiety disorders. The most common individual disorders are major depressive disorder, alcohol abuse, and specific phobias (e.g., fear of small animals, insects, flying, heights). Social phobias (e.g., fear of public speaking) are similarly very common (see Table 1.2). Although lifetime rates of mental disorders appear to be quite high, it is important to remember that, in some cases, the duration of the disorder may be relatively brief (e.g., depres- sion that lasts for a few weeks after the breakup of a romantic relationship). Furthermore, many people who meet criteria for a given disorder will not be seriously affected by it. For instance, in the NCS-R study, almost half (48%) of the people diagnosed with a specific phobia had disorders that were rated as mild in severity, and only 22 percent of phobias were regarded as severe (Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2005c). Meeting diagnostic criteria for a particular disorder and being seriously impaired by that disorder are not necessarily synonymous. A final finding from the NCS-R study was the widespread occurrence of comorbidity among diagnosed disorders (Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2005c).   Comorbidity   is the term used to describe the presence of two or more disorders in the same person. Comorbidity is especially high in people who have severe forms of mental disorders. In the NCS-R study, half of the individu- als with a disorder rated as serious on a scale of severity (mild, moderate, and serious) had two or more additional disorders. An illustration of this would be a person who drinks excessively and who is simultaneously depressed and suffering from an anxiety disorder. In contrast, only 7 percent of the people who had a mild form of a disorder also had two or more other diagnos- able conditions. What this indicates is that comorbidity is much more likely to occur in people who have the most serious forms of mental disorders. When the condition is mild, comorbidity is the exception rather than the rule.  Treatment  Many treatments for psychological disorders are now available. These include medications as well as different forms of psycho- therapy. Treatment is such an important topic that we discuss it  Disorders do not always occur in isolation. A person who abuses alcohol may also be depressed or pathologically anxious.  table   1.1  Prevalence of   DSM-IV   Disorders in Adults in the United States 1-Year (%)   Lifetime (%)  Any anxiety disorder   18.1   28.8 Any mood disorder   9.5   20.8 Any substance-abuse disorder   3.8   14.6 Any disorder   26.2   46.4 Sources: Kessler et al. (2005a, 2005c)  table   1.2  Most Common Individual Mental Disorders in the United States Disorder 1-Year Prevalence (%) Lifetime Prevalence (%)  Major depressive disorder   6.7   16.6 Alcohol abuse   3.1   13.2 Specific phobia   8.7   12.5 Social phobia   6.8   12.1 Conduct disorder   1.0   9.5 Sources: Kessler et al. (2005a, 2005c)
throughout the book in the various chapters on specific disor- ders. In addition, in  6 we discuss different approaches to treatment more broadly and describe different types of therapy in detail. However, it is important to emphasize that not all people with psychological disorders receive treatment. In some cases, people deny or minimize their suffering. Others try to cope on their own and may manage to recover without ever seeking aid from a mental health professional. Even when they recognize that they have a problem, it is typical for individuals to wait a long time before deciding to seek help. Half of individuals with depression delay seeking treatment for more than 6 to 8 years. For anxiety disorders, the delay ranges from 9 to 23 years (Wang, Berglund, et al., 2005)! When people with mental disorders do seek help, they are often treated by their family physician rather than by a mental health specialist (Wang et al., 2005). It is also the case that the vast majority of mental health treatment is now administered on an outpatient (as opposed to an inpatient) basis (Narrow et al., 1993; O’Donnell et al., 2000). Outpatient treatment requires that a patient visit a mental health facility practitioner; however, the patient does not have to be admitted to the hospi- tal or stay there overnight. A patient may attend a community mental health center, see a private therapist, or receive treatment through the outpatient department of a hospital. Hospitalization and inpatient care are the preferred options for people who need more intensive treatment than can be provided on an outpatient basis. Various surveys indicate that admission to mental hospitals has decreased substantially over the past 45 years. The development of medications that control the symptoms of the most severe disorders is one reason for this change. Budget cuts have also forced many large state or county facilities to close. The limitations that insurance companies place on hospital admissions is another relevant factor here. If a hos- pital stay is not authorized by the insurance company, patients must seek treatment elsewhere. Patients who need inpatient care are usually admitted to the psychiatric units of general hospitals (Narrow et al., 1993) or to private psychiatric hospitals specializing in particular mental disorders (Kiesler & Simpkins, 1993). Stays in inpatient facilities tend to be much shorter than they were in the past (see Case et al., 2007; Lay et al., 2007). Patients receive additional treat- ment on an outpatient basis. This trend away from the use of tra- ditional hospitalization began several decades ago. It is referred to as deinstitutionalization and is discussed further in Chapter 2.  Mental Health Professionals  When patients receive inpatient treatment, several different mental health professionals often work as a team to provide the necessary care. A psychiatrist may prescribe medications and monitor the patient for side effects. A clinical psychologist may provide individual therapy, meeting with the patient sev- eral times a week. A clinical social worker may help the patient resolve family problems, and a psychiatric nurse may check in with the patient on a daily basis to provide support and help the patient cope better in the hospital environment. The intensity of treatment that is typical in a hospital setting is designed to help the patient get better as rapidly as possible. Patients treated in outpatient settings may also work with a team of professionals. However, the number of mental health specialists involved is typically much smaller. In some cases a patient will receive all treatment from a psychiatrist, who will prescribe medication and also provide psychotherapy. Other patients will receive medications from a psychiatrist and see a psychologist or a clinical social worker for regular therapy ses- sions. In other cases, depending on the type and severity of the problem, a patient ( client   is the preferred term in some settings) may see a counseling psychologist, a psychoanalyst, or a coun- selor specialized in the treatment of drug and alcohol problems.  in review  •   What is epidemiology?  •   What is the difference between prevalence and incidence?  •   What are the most common mental disorders?  •   How is illness severity associated with comorbidity?  Research Approaches in Abnormal Psychology  As is apparent from the NCS-R study, the lives of large numbers of people are affected by mental disorders. To learn all that we can about these conditions, we need to conduct research. In this way, we can study the characteristics or nature of disorders. Through research we can learn about the symptoms of the disor- der, its prevalence, whether it tends to be either   acute   (short in duration) or   chronic   (long in duration), and the problems and deficits that often accompany it. Research allows us to further understand the   etiology   (or causes) of disorders. Finally, we need research to provide the best care for the patients who are seeking assistance with their dif- ficulties. All of the authors of this book are practicing clinicians. As such, we turn to the research literature to help us provide the most effective and up-to-date care for the patients whom we see. Students new to the field of abnormal psychology often assume that all answers may be revealed through scrutinizing past case studies. However, when we study individual cases and derive inferences from them, we are as likely to develop errors in our thinking as we are to obtain knowledge. One such error is that we often attend only to data that confirm our view of how things are. For example, Dr. Smart might believe that drinking milk causes schizophrenia. When we ask Dr. Smart why he holds this view, he might say it is because every patient he has ever treated who has schizophrenia has drunk milk at some time in his or her life. Given that Dr. Smart has treated a lot of patients with schizophrenia and clearly has a great deal of experience with the disorder, we might be persuaded that he is right. Then along comes Dr. Notsofast.
Dr. Notsofast decides to conduct a research study. He studies two groups of people: One group has schizophrenia; the other group does not have schizophrenia. Dr. Notsofast asks all of them about their milk-drinking habits. He finds that everyone has drunk milk at some point in his or her life and that there are no differences between the two groups with respect to their milk-drinking histories. As this simple example illustrates, research prevents us from being misled by natural errors in thinking. In short, research protects investigators from their own biases in perception and inference (Raulin & Lilienfeld, 2009). Abnormal psychology research can take place in clinics, hos- pitals, schools, prisons, and even highly unstructured contexts such as naturalistic observations of the homeless on the street. It is not the setting that determines whether a given research proj- ect may be undertaken. As Kazdin aptly points out (1998b, p. x), “methodology is not merely a compilation of practices and pro- cedures. Rather it is an approach toward problem solving, think- ing, and acquiring knowledge.” As such, research methodology (that is, the scientific processes and procedures we use to conduct research) is constantly evolving. As new techniques become available (brain-imaging techniques and new statistical procedures, to name a few), methodology in turn evolves. In the sections that follow, we introduce some funda- mental research concepts so that you may begin to think critically like a clinical scientist. For further help, in some chapters we use a Research Close-Up to draw your attention to some key terms that are central to the comprehension of psychological research.  Sources of Information  Case Studies  As humans, we often direct our attention to the people around us. If you were asked to describe your best friend, your father, or even the professor teaching your abnormal psychology class, you would undoubtedly have plenty to say. As is the case in virtually all other sciences, the foundation of psychological knowledge stems from observation. Indeed, a large amount of early knowl- edge was distilled from case studies in which specific individuals were described in great detail. Astute clinicians such as the German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin (1856–1926) and the Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler (1857–1939) provided us with detailed accounts of patients whom a modern-day reader would easily recognize as having disorders such as schizophrenia and manic depression. Alois Alzheimer (1864–1915) depicted a patient with an unusual clinical picture that subsequently became known as Alzheimer’s disease. Sigmund Freud (1856–1939), the founder of psy- choanalysis, published multiple clinical cases describing what we now recognize as phobia (the case of “Little Hans”) and obsessive-compulsive disorder (“the Rat Man”). Such portrayals make for fascinating reading, even today. Much can be learned when skilled clinicians use the   case study   method. Still, the information presented in them is sub- ject to   bias   because the writer of the case study selects what information to include and what information to omit. Another concern is that the material in a case study is often relevant only to the individual being described. This means that the conclu- sions of a case study have low   generalizability —that is, they cannot be used to draw conclusions about other cases even when those cases involve people with a seemingly similar abnormality. When there is only one observer and one subject, and when the observations are made in a relatively uncontrolled context and are anecdotal and impressionistic in nature, the conclusions we can draw are very narrow and may be mistaken. Nonetheless, case studies are an excellent way to illustrate clinical material. They can also provide some limited support for a particular theory or provide some negative evidence that can challenge a prevailing idea or assumption. Importantly, case studies can be a valuable source of new ideas and serve as a stimulus for research, and they may provide insight into unusual clinical conditions that are too rare to be studied in a more systematic way.  Self-Report Data  If we wish to study behavior in a more rigorous manner, how do we go about doing so? One approach is to collect   self-report data   from the people we wish to learn more about. This might involve having our research participants complete questionnaires of various types. Another way of collecting self-report data is from interviews. The researcher asks a series of questions and then records what the person says. Asking people to report on their subjective experiences might appear to be an excellent way to collect information. However, as a research approach it has some limitations. Self- report data can sometimes be misleading. One problem is that people may not be very good reporters of their own subjective states or experiences. For example, when asked in an interview,  Abnormal psychology research can be conducted in a variety of settings outside the research laboratory, including clinics, hospitals, schools, or prisons.
one child may report that he has 20 “best friends.” Yet, when we observe him, he may always be playing alone. Because people will occasionally lie, misinterpret the question, or desire to pres- ent themselves in a particularly favorable (or unfavorable) light, self-report data cannot always be regarded as highly accurate and truthful. This is something that anyone who has ever tried online dating knows only too well! And if you still need convincing, ask three people to tell you their weight. Then ask them to step on a scale. How likely is it that the weight they self-report will be the weight that appears when they step on the scale? What reasons do you think might explain the discrepancy?  Observational Approaches  When we collect information in a way that does not involve asking people directly (self-report), we are using some form of observational approach. Exactly how we go about this depends on what it is we seek to understand. For example, if we are studying aggressive children, we may wish to have trained observers record the number of times children who are classified as being aggressive hit, bite, push, punch, or kick their play- mates. This would involve   direct observation   of the children’s behavior. We may also collect information about biological variables (such as heart rate) in our sample of aggressive children. Alterna- tively, we could collect information about stress hormones, such as cortisol, by asking the observed children to spit into a plastic container (because cortisol is found in saliva). We would then send the saliva samples to the lab for analysis. This, too, is a form of observational data; it tells us something that we want to know using a variable that is relevant to our interests. Technology has advanced, and we are now developing methods to study behaviors, moods, and cognitions that have long been considered inaccessible. For example, we can now use brain-imaging techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study the working brain. We can study blood flow to various parts of the brain during memory tasks. We can even look at which brain areas influence imagination. With other techniques such as transcranial magnetic stimu- lation (TMS; see Figure 1.1), which generates a magnetic field on the surface of the head, we can stimulate underlying brain tissue (for an overview, see Fitzgerald et al., 2002). This can be done painlessly and noninvasively while the person receiving the TMS sits in an armchair. Using TMS, we can even take a particular area of the brain “off-line” for a few seconds and mea- sure the behavioral consequences. In short, we can now collect observational data that would have been impossible to obtain in the past. In practice, much clinical research involves a mix of self- report and observational methods. Also, keep in mind that when we refer to observing behavior we mean much more than simply watching people. Observing behavior, in this con- text, refers to careful scrutiny of the conduct and manner of specific individuals (e.g., healthy people, people with depres- sion, people with anxiety, people with schizophrenia). We may study social behavior in a sample of patients with depression by enlisting trained observers to record the frequency with which the patients smile or make eye contact. We may also ask the patients themselves to fill out self-report questionnaires that assess social skills. If we think that sociability in patients with depression may be related to (or correlated with) their severity of depression, we may further ask patients to complete self- report measures designed to assess that severity. We may even measure levels of certain substances in patients’ blood, urine, or cerebrospinal fluid (the clear fluid that bathes the brain and that can be obtained by performing a lumbar puncture). Finally, we could possibly study the depressed patients’ brains directly via brain-imaging approaches. These diverse sources of information would provide us with potentially valuable data, the basis of scientific inquiry.  in review  •   What are the strengths and limitations of case studies?  •   Why is it desirable not to rely solely on self-report data as a source of information?  Wire coil  Pulsed Head support magnetic field Stimulated Chin support brain region  figure   1.1  Researchers use technology, such as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), to study how the brain works. This TMS technique generates a magnetic field on the surface of the head through which underlying brain tissue is stimulated. Researchers can evaluate and measure behavioral consequences of this noninvasive and painless brain stimulation.
•   What is the difference between self-report and observational data? What range of measures could be considered to reflect observational data?  Forming and Testing Hypotheses  Research is all about asking questions. To make sense of behav- ior, researchers generate hypotheses. A   hypothesis   is an effort to explain, predict, or explore something. What distinguishes scien- tific hypotheses from the vague speculation that we all routinely engage in is that scientists attempt to test their hypotheses. In other words, they try to design research studies that will help them approach a fuller understanding of how and why things happen. Anecdotal accounts such as case studies can be very valu- able in helping us develop hypotheses, although case studies are not well suited for testing the hypotheses that they may have inspired. Other sources of hypotheses are unusual or unexpected research findings. One example is the higher-than-expected rate of suicide in women who have had cosmetic breast augmentation (Sarwer et al., 2007). Consider for a moment why this associa- tion might exist. Possible explanations might include higher rates of psychopathology in women who seek breast augmentation, unrealistic expectations about the positive effects that the surgery would have on their lives, postoperative complications that could lead to depressed mood, and other factors such as preoperative body image dissatisfaction. Another observation in search of an explanation is the find- ing that, although men generally have lower rates of depression than women, this is not true of Jewish men. Why should Jew- ish men be more at risk for depression than non-Jewish men? One hypothesis is that there may be an interesting (and inverse) relationship between depression and alcohol use (Levav et al., 1997). Jewish men have lower rates of alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence than do non-Jewish men. Consistent with this idea, a study of members of Orthodox synagogues in London found no alcoholism and similar rates of depression in females and males (i.e., a 1:1 gender ratio instead of the typical 2:1 ratio; Loewenthal et al., 1995). Although much more remains to be uncovered, the hypothesis that higher rates of depression in Jewish men may be related to their lower rates of alcohol abuse appears to merit further study (see Loewenthal et al., 2003). Hypotheses are vital because they frequently determine the therapeutic approaches used to treat a particular clinical prob- lem. The ideas we have about what might be causing a client’s difficulties will naturally shape the form of intervention we use when we provide treatment. For instance, suppose we are con- fronted with someone who washes his or her hands 60 to 100 times a day, causing serious injury to the skin and underlying tis- sues (this is an example of obsessive-compulsive disorder). If we believe that this behavior is a result of subtle problems in certain neural circuits, we may try to identify which circuits are dysfunc- tional in the hope of ultimately finding a means of correcting them (perhaps with medication). On the other hand, if we view the excessive hand washing as reflecting a symbolic cleansing of sinful and unacceptable thoughts, we may try to unearth and address the sources of the person’s excessive guilt and concern with morality. Finally, if we regard the hand washing as merely the product of unfortunate conditioning or learning, we may devise a means to extinguish the problematic behavior. In other words, our working hypoth- eses regarding the causes of different disorders very much shape the approaches we use when we study and treat the disorders.  Sampling and Generalization  We can occasionally glean instructive leads from careful scru- tiny of a single case. However, this strategy rarely yields enough information to allow us to reach firm conclusions. Research in abnormal psychology is concerned with gaining enhanced under- standing and, where possible, control of abnormal behavior (i.e., the ability to alter it in predictable ways). Edward, for instance, may accost women in supermarkets and try to lick their feet because his mother always gave him attention when, as a child, he tried on her shoes. In contrast, George may engage in the same behavior for an entirely different reason. We need to study a larger group of individuals with the same problem in order to discover which of our observations or hypotheses possess scien- tific credibility. The more people we study, the more confident we can be about our findings. Whom should we include in our research study? In gen- eral, we want to study groups of individuals who have similar  Although men generally have lower rates of depression than women, the rate of depression for Jewish men and women is equal. Why would this be? A correlation between higher rates of depression and lower rates of alcohol abuse in Jewish men provides interesting ground for further study.
abnormalities of behavior. If we wanted to study people with panic disorder, a first step would be to determine criteria such as those provided in the current   DSM   for identifying people affected with this clinical disorder. We would then need to find people who fit our criteria. Ideally, we would study everyone in the world who met our criteria because these people constitute our population of interest. This, of course, is impossible to do, so instead we would try to get a representative sample of people who are drawn from this underlying population. To do this, we would use a technique called   sampling . What this means is that we would try to select people who are representative of the much larger group of individuals with panic disorder (in the same way that jury selection involves having a representative sample of eli- gible voters). Ideally, we would like our smaller sample (our study group) to mirror the larger group (the underlying population) in all important ways (e.g., in severity and duration of disorder and in demographics such as age, gender, and marital status). If we could do everything perfectly, our research sample would be randomly selected from the larger population of people with panic disorder, which is tantamount to ensuring that every person in that population would have an equal chance of being included in our study. Such a procedure would automatically adjust for potential biases in sample selection. In practice, however, this does not happen, and researchers must simply do the best they can given real-world constraints (including the fact that some people don’t wish to participate in a research study!). Because finding research participants is not always easy, researchers sometimes use “samples of convenience” in their studies. This means that they study groups of people who are easily accessible to them and who are readily available. Have you noticed how much research is conducted using college students? Is this because college students are intrinsically fascinating people to study? Or are other factors in play here?  Internal and External Validity  From a research perspective, the more representative our sample is, the better able we are to generalize (or extend the findings from our study) to the larger group. The extent to which we can generalize our findings beyond the study itself is called   external validity . A research study that involves both males and females from all age groups, income levels, and education levels is more representative of the underlying population (and will have greater external validity) than research using only female college students, for example. In addition, when we study a group of people who all share a defining characteristic (e.g., a specific disorder), we may then be able to infer that additional commonalities that they share (such as a family history of depression or low levels of certain neu- rotransmitters) may be related to the disorder itself. Of course, this is based on the assumption that the characteristic in question is not widely shared by people who do not have the disorder. Unlike external validity, which concerns the degree that research findings from a specific study can be generalized to other samples, contexts, or times,   internal validity   reflects how confi- dent we can be in the results of a particular given study. In other words, internal validity is the extent to which a study is method- ologically sound, free of confounds, or other sources of error, and able to be used to draw valid conclusions. For example, suppose that a researcher is interested in how heart rate changes when par- ticipants are told that they are about to be given an electric shock. Imagine also how much faith you might have in the results of the research if participants who have just completed the study are allowed to chat in the waiting area with people who are just about to participate. What if the latter learn that, in reality, no shocks are given at all? How might this information change how subjects respond? Failure to control the exchange of information in this way clearly jeopardizes the integrity of the study and is a threat to its internal validity. Some subjects (those who have not been given prior information) will expect to receive real shocks; others will not because, unbeknownst to the experimenter, information has been leaked to them beforehand.  Criterion and Comparison Groups  To test their hypotheses, researchers use a   comparison group  (sometimes called a   control group ). This may be defined as a group of people who do not exhibit the disorder being studied but who are comparable in all other major respects to the   criterion group   (i.e., people with the disorder). By “comparable” we might mean that the two groups are similar in age, number of males and females in each group, education level, and similar demographic variables. Typically, the comparison group is psychologically healthy, or “normal,” according to certain specified criteria. We can then compare the two groups on the variables of interest. To further illustrate the idea of criterion and control groups, let us return to our example about schizophrenia and milk. Dr. Smart’s hypothesis was that drinking milk causes schizophrenia. However, when a group of patients with  Why is so much research conducted using college students? What are the advantages and disadvantages of this?
schizophrenia (the criterion group or the group of interest) was compared with a group of patients who did not have schizophre- nia (the control group), it was clear that there were no differ- ences in milk drinking between the two groups. Using the controlled research approaches we have just described, researchers have learned much about many different psy- chological disorders. We can also use extensions of this approach not only to compare one cohort of patients with healthy controls but also to compare groups of patients with different disorders. For example, Cutting and Murphy (1990) studied how well (1) patients with schizophrenia, (2) patients with depression or mania, and (3) healthy controls performed on a questionnaire testing social knowledge. This involved a series of multiple- choice questions that presented a social problem (e.g., “How would you tell a friend politely that he had stayed too long?”). Possible answer choices included responses such as, “There’s no more coffee left” and “You’d better go. I’m fed up with you staying too long.” (In case you are wondering, both of these are incorrect choices; the preferred answer for this example was, “Excuse me. I’ve got an appointment with a friend.”) Consistent with the literature showing that social deficits are associated with schizophrenia, the patients with schizophrenia did worse on this test relative to both the healthy controls and the depressed or manic patients. The finding that the patients with schizophrenia did more poorly than the depressed or manic patients allowed the researchers to rule out the possibility that sim- ply being a psychiatric patient is linked to poor social knowledge.  in review  •   Explain what the term   representative sample   means.  •   What is a sample of convenience?  •   What is the difference between internal and external validity? How can external validity be maximized?  •   Why are comparison or control groups so important?  Research Designs  Studying the World as It Is: Correlational Research Designs  A major goal of researchers in abnormal psychology is to learn about the causes of different disorders. For ethical and practical reasons, however, we often cannot do this directly. Perhaps we want to learn about factors that result in depression. We may hypothesize that stress of losing a parent early in life may be important in this regard. Needless to say, we cannot create such situations and then see what unfolds! Instead, the researcher uses what is known as a   correlational research   design. Unlike a true experimental research design (described later), correlational research does not involve any manip- ulation of variables. Rather, the researcher selects certain groups of interest (e.g., people who have recently been exposed to a great deal of stress, or people who lost a parent when they were growing up). She would then compare the groups on a variety of different mea- sures (including, in this example, levels of depression). Any time we study differences between individuals who have a particular disorder and those who do not, we are utilizing this type of correlational research design. Essentially, we are capital- izing on the fact that the world works in ways that create natural groupings of people (people with specific disorders, people who have had traumatic experiences, people who win lotteries, etc.) whom we can then study. Using these types of research designs, we are able to identify factors that appear to be associated with depression, alcoholism, binge eating, or alternate psychological states of distress (for a more comprehensive description of this kind of research approach, see Kazdin, 1998b).  Measuring Correlation  Correlational research takes things as they are and determines associations among observed phenomena. Do measures vary together in a direct, corresponding manner (known as   a positive correlation —see Figure 1.2 below) such as in the example we mentioned earlier showing that breast augmentation surgery was correlated with increased risk of suicide? Or conversely, is there an inverse correlation, or   negative correlation , between the variables of interest (such as high socioeconomic status and decreased risk of psychopathology)? Or finally, are the variables in question entirely independent of one another, or uncorrelated, such that a given state or level of one variable fails to predict reliably the degree of the other variable, as was the case with our example about milk and schizophrenia? The strength of a   correlation   is measured by a   correlation coefficient , which is denoted by the symbol   r . A correlation runs from 0 to 1, with a number closer to 1 representing a stronger association between the two variables. The   +   sign or   -   sign indi- cates the direction of the association between the variables. For example, a positive correlation means that higher scores on one variable are associated with higher scores on the other variable, as might be the case for hours spent studying and grade point aver- age. A negative correlation means that, as scores on one variable go up, scores on the other variable tend to go down. An example here might be the association between hours spent partying and grade point average.  Statistical Significance  If you read a research article, you are likely to see correlations reported in the text. Next to the correlation you will almost certainly see a notation that reads p   6   .05. This is the level of  statistical significance . But what does this mean? Simply put, it means that the probability that the correlation would occur purely by chance is less than 5 out of 100. Researchers adopt this conventional level of significance and consider correlations that have a p   6   .05 to be statistically significant and worthy of atten- tion. Of course, this does not mean that the result in question could not have occurred by chance; it simply means that it is not very likely.
Statistical significance is influenced not only by the mag- nitude or size of the correlation between the two variables but also by the sample size. A correlation of .30 will not be signifi- cant if the sample size is 20 people but will be significant if the sample size is 50 people. Correlations based on very large samples (e.g., 1,000 people) can be very small and yet still reach statistical significance. Conversely, correlations drawn from small samples need to be very large to reach statistical significance.  Effect Size  The fact that statistical significance is influenced by sample size creates a problem when we want to compare findings across studies. Suppose that Dr. Green reports a significant association between two variables in her study. But, in a second study, Dr. Blue reports no significant correlation between these same two variables. This is not an uncommon occurrence in the   scientific lit- erature, and it often creates a lot of confusion about whose results are “correct.” But if Dr. Green has a larger sample size than Dr. Blue, the same-size correlation will be significant in Dr. Green’s study but not reach statistical significance in Dr. Blue’s study. To avoid the problems inherent in just focusing on statistical significance, and to facilitate comparison of results across different studies (which invariably have different sample sizes), researchers often report a statistic called the   effect size . The effect size reflects the size of the association between two variables independent of the sample size. An effect size of zero means there is no association between the variables. Because it is independent of sample size, the effect size can be used as a common metric and  B   C Strong positive correlation between two variables (e.g., weight and calorie intake) Astrological sign No correlation between two variables (e.g., weight and astrological sign) Weak positive correlation between two variables (e.g., weight and hours of video game playing) Time spent exercising Strong negative correlation between two variables (e.g., weight and exercise) Broccoli consumption Weak negative correlation between two variables (e.g., weight and broccoli consumption) Calorie intake Weight Weight Hours of video game playing Weight Weight Weight A  figure   1.2  Scatterplots of data illustrating positive, negative, and no correlation between two variables. Dots indicate a given person’s score on the two variables of interest. A strong positive correlation ( r   =   + 1.0) means that high scores on one variable are associated with high scores on the second variable, creating a forward-sloping straight line. For example, we would expect there to be a positive correlation between weight and the number of calories eaten per day. When there is a strong negative correlation ( r   =   - 1.0), high scores on the first variable are associated with low scores on the second variable, creating a backward-sloping straight line. A relevant example here would be the as- sociation between weight and time spent exercising per day. When there is no correlation ( r   =   0), scores on the independent variable tell us nothing about scores on the dependent variable. An example here might involve weight and astrological sign.
is very valuable when we want to compare the strength of findings across different studies. If the effect size is about the same in the studies of both Dr. Green and Dr. Blue, we can conclude that they really had similar findings, regardless of the fact that the results were significant in one study but not in the other.  Meta-Analysis  When researchers want to summarize research findings in a specific area, they often do a literature search and write a review. In drawing their conclusions they will rely on significance levels, noting whether more studies than not found a significant asso- ciation between two variables, such as smoking and health. A far better approach, however, is to conduct a   meta-analysis . A meta-analysis is a statistical approach that calculates and then combines the effect sizes from all of the studies. Within a meta-analysis, each separate study can be thought of as being equivalent to an individual participant in a conventional research design. Because it uses effect sizes, a meta-analysis provides a better way to summarize research findings than is possible with a literature review.  Correlations and Causality  When it comes to correlations, one thing is very important to remember: Correlation does not mean causation. Just because two variables are correlated does not tell us anything about why they are correlated. This is true regardless of the size of the cor- relation. Many research investigations in abnormal psychology reveal that two (or more) things regularly occur together, such as poverty and diminished intellectual development, or depression and reported prior stressors. This in no way affirms that one fac- tor is the cause of the other. Consider, for example, the positive correlation that exists between ice cream consumption and drowning. Does this mean that eating ice cream compromises swimming ability and so leads to drowning? Or that people who are about to drown themselves like to have one final ice cream cone before they enter the water? Both of these alternatives are clearly absurd. Much more likely is that some unknown third variable might be causing both events to happen. This is known as the   third variable problem . What might the third variable be in this example? After a moment’s reflection, you might realize that a very plausible third variable is hot summer weather. Ice cream consumption increases in the summer months. So, too, does the number of people who drown because more people swim during the summer than at any other time. The correlation between ice cream consumption and drowning is a spurious one, caused by the fact that both variables are correlated with the weather. To use an example from abnormal psychology, it was once thought that masturbation caused insanity. This hypothesis no doubt arose from the fact that, historically, patients in mental asylums could often be seen masturbating in full view of others. Of course, we now know that masturbation and insanity were correlated not because masturbation caused insanity but because sane people are much more likely to masturbate in private than in public. In other words, the key factor linking the insanity and masturbation (and the unmeasured third variable) was that of impaired social awareness. Even though correlational studies may not be able to pin- point causal relationships, they can be a powerful and rich source of inference. They often suggest causal hypotheses (increased height may cause increased weight; increased weight is unlikely to cause increased height), generate questions for further research, and occasionally provide crucial data that may confirm or refute specific hypotheses. Much of what we know about mental disorders is derived from correlational studies. The fact that we cannot manipulate many of the variables we study does not mean that we cannot learn a great deal from such approaches.  Retrospective Versus Prospective Strategies  Correlational research designs can be used to study different groups of patients as they are at the time of the study (i.e., con- currently). For example, if we used brain imaging to look at the size of certain brain structures in patients with schizophrenia and in healthy controls, we would be using this type of approach. But if we wanted to learn what our patients were like before they developed a specific disorder, we might adopt a   retrospective research   strategy. This involves looking back in time. In other words, we would try to collect information about how the patients behaved early in their lives with the goal of identifying factors that might have been associated with what went wrong later. In some cases, our source material might be limited to a patient’s recollections, the recollections of family members, material from diaries, or other records. A challenge with this technique is the potential for memories to be both faulty and selective. There are certain difficulties in attempting to reconstruct the pasts of people already experiencing a disorder. Apart from the fact that a person who currently has a mental disorder may not be the most accurate or objective source of information, such a strategy invites investigators to discover what they already presume they will discover concerning background factors theo- retically linked to a disorder. It invites biased procedure, uncon- scious or otherwise. For instance, reports of a link between early sexual abuse and various forms of psychopathology began to emerge in the 1980s. After these reports came out, many therapists proceeded to suggest to their patients with such conditions that perhaps they too had been abused. For certain overzealous therapists, the fact that many patients had no memories of any abuse was taken as evidence that the painful memories had simply been “repressed.” In other cases, a patient’s simply having such common problems as difficulty sleeping or being easily startled was taken as evidence of past abuse. Over time, many patients became as convinced as
their therapists that they must have been abused and that this accounted for their current difficulties. But for many patients, it simply was not the case that they had been abused. This under- scores the pitfalls inherent in trying to reinterpret a person’s past (or past behavior) in light of his or her present problems. Adher- ence to fundamental scientific principles is as crucial in the clini- cal domain as it is in the research laboratory. Another approach is to use a   prospective research   strat- egy, which involves looking ahead in time. Here the idea is to identify individuals who have a higher-than-average likelihood of becoming psychologically disordered and to focus research atten- tion on them before any disorder manifests. We can have much more confidence in our hypotheses about the causes of a disorder if we have been tracking influences and measuring them prior to the development of the illness in question. When our hypoth- eses correctly predict the behavioral problems that a group of individuals will later develop, we are much closer to establishing a causal relationship. A study that follows people over time and that tries to identify factors that predate the onset of a disorder employs a   longitudinal design . A prototypical illustration might be a study that follows, from infancy to adulthood, the children of mothers with schizophrenia. By collecting data on the chil- dren at regular intervals, researchers can compare those who later develop schizophrenia with those who do not, with the goal of identifying important differentiating factors. In another example of a longitudinal design, researchers have shown that adolescents who report suicidal thoughts at age 15 are much more likely to have psychological problems and to have attempted suicide by age 30 than people who do not have suicidal ideas in their teens (Reinherz et al., 2006).  Manipulating Variables: The Experimental Method in Abnormal Psychology  As you have already learned, even when we find strong positive or negative associations between variables, correlational research does not allow us to draw any conclusions about directionality (i.e., does variable A cause B, or does B cause A?). This is known as the   direction of effect problem . To draw conclusions about causality and resolve questions of directionality, an   experimental research   approach must be used. In such cases, scientists control all factors except one—the factor that could have an effect on a variable or outcome of interest. They then actively manipulate (or influence) that one factor. The factor that is manipulated is referred to as the   independent variable . If the outcome of inter- est, called the   dependent variable , is observed to change as the manipulated factor is changed, then that independent variable can be regarded as a cause of the outcome (see Figure 1.3). In Romania, children who are abandoned by their par- ents are traditionally raised in orphanages rather than in foster care. To study the cognitive effects of institutional versus other forms of care, researchers randomly assigned 136 children who had been institutionalized as babies to either remain in these institutions or be raised by foster families (see Nelson et al., 2007). These foster parents had been recruited for the study by the researchers. Another sample of children who lived with their birth families was also studied for comparison purposes. All the children received cognitive testing when they were 30, 42, and 54 months old. In this study, the independent variable is the liv- ing situation of the child (orphanage or foster care). The depen- dent variable is intellectual functioning. Did the children assigned to foster care fare better than the children who remained in institutions? The answer is yes. At both the 42-month and the 54-month assessments, the children in foster families had significantly higher scores on the measure of cognitive functioning than the children who remained institutionalized. We can therefore conclude that there was something about being raised in a foster family that was responsible for the increased intellec- tual development of these children. Sadly, however, the cognitive development of both groups of children was much lower than the intellectual functioning of children who were raised in typical fami- lies. The results of this unique study therefore tell us that, although foster care helps abandoned children, these children remain at a disadvantage relative to children who are raised by their biologi- cal families. However, based at least partially on the findings from this remarkable study, Romania no longer allows children without severe disabilities to be placed in institutional care.  Studying the Efficacy of Therapy  Researchers in abnormal psychology are often interested in learning which treatments work for specific disorders. Used in the context of treatment research, the experimental method has proved to be indispensable. It is a relatively straightforward pro- cess to establish: A proposed treatment is given to a designated group of patients and withheld from a similar group of patients. Should the treated group show significantly more improvement than the untreated group, we can have confidence in the treat- ment’s efficacy. We may not, however, know why the treatment works, although investigators are becoming increasingly sophisti- cated in fine-tuning their experiments to tease out the means by which therapeutic change is induced (e.g., Hollon et al., 1987; Jacobson et al., 1996; Kazdin & Nock, 2003). The Develop- ments in Research box on page 24 provides a nice example of a treatment research study. The findings of this study also show just how powerful placebo effects can be. In treatment research it is important that the two groups (treated and untreated) be as equivalent as possible except for the presence or absence of the proposed active treatment. To facilitate this, patients are typically randomly assigned to the treatment condition or the no-treatment condition.   Random assignment   means that every research participant has an equal chance of being placed in the treatment or the no-treatment con- dition. Once a treatment has been established as effective, it can then be provided for members of the original control (untreated) group, leading to improved functioning for all those involved.
(A) Correlational Research  Sample Sample Data collection   Assessment Data collection   Assessment Compare responses between two groups Population Population  Random assignment Random assignment  (B) Experimental Research  Administer treatment Baseline assessment Compare responses between two groups Administer control Assess response Assess response Sample Population  figure   1.3  Correlational and Experimental Research Designs.   (A) In correlational research, data are collected from two different samples or groups and are then compared. (B) In experimental research, participants are assessed at baseline and then randomly assigned to different groups (e.g., a treatment and a control condition). After the experiment or treatment is completed, data collected from the two different groups are then compared.   (Adapted from Petrie & Sabin, 2000. Medical Statistics at a Glance. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Science Ltd.)  Sometimes, however, this “waiting list” control group strategy is deemed inadvisable for ethical or other reasons. With- holding a treatment that has been established as beneficial just to evaluate a new form of treatment may deprive control subjects of valuable clinical help for longer than would be considered appro- priate. For this reason, there need to be stringent safeguards regarding the potential costs versus benefits of conducting the particular research project. In certain cases, an alternative research design may be called for in which two (or more) treatments are compared in differing yet comparable groups. This method is termed a   standard treatment comparison study . Typically, the efficacy of the control condition has been previously established; thus, patients who are assigned to this condition are not disadvantaged. Instead, the question is whether patients who receive the new treatment improve to a greater extent than those receiving the control (established) treatment. Such comparative-outcome research has much to recom- mend it and is being increasingly employed (Kendall et al., 2004).  Single-Case Experimental Designs  Does experimental research always involve testing hypotheses by manipulating variables across groups? The simple answer is no. We have already noted the importance of case studies as a source of ideas and hypotheses. In addition, case studies can be used to develop and test therapy techniques within a scientific frame- work. Such approaches are called   single-case research designs  (Hayes, 1998; Kazdin, 1998a, 1998b). A central feature of such designs is that the same individual is studied over time. Behav- ior or performance at one point in time can then be compared to behavior or performance at a later time, after a specific inter- vention or treatment has been introduced. For example, using
a single-case design, Wallenstein and Nock (2007) were able to show that exercise helped a 26-year-old female patient to sig- nificantly decrease the frequency of her nonsuicidal self-injuring behaviors, which included self-hitting and head-banging. One of the most basic experimental designs in single-case research is called the   ABAB design . The different letters refer to different phases of the intervention. The first A phase serves as a baseline condition. Here we simply collect data on or from the participant. Then, in the first B phase, we introduce our treatment. Perhaps the person’s behavior changes in some way. Even if there is a change, however, we are not justified in concluding that it was due to the introduction of our treatment. Other factors might have coincided with its introduction, so any association between the treatment and the behavior change might be spurious. To establish whether it really was the treatment that was important, we therefore withdraw the treatment and see what happens. This is the reasoning behind the second A phase (i.e., at the ABA point). Finally, to demonstrate that the behavior observed during the B phase is attainable once again, we reinstate our treatment and see if the behavioral changes we saw in the first B phase become apparent again. To further clarify the logic behind the ABAB design, let’s consider the case of Kris (see Rapp et al., 2000).  developments in reSearCh  Do Magnets Help With Repetitive-Stress Injury?  M agnets are often marketed to people who have chronic hand or wrist pain. This type of problem is known as repetitive-stress injury (RSI) and can be caused by extensive computer use. But do magnets really re- lieve the chronic pain that is associated with RSI? Testimonials notwithstanding, the only way to answer this question is by con- trolled research. Pope and McNally (2002) randomly assigned college students with RSI to one of three groups. One group was asked to wear wristbands containing magnets for a 30-minute period (magnet group). A second group was also given seemingly identical bracelets to wear. In this case, however, and unknown both to the participants and to the assistant running the study, the magnets had been removed from the wristbands (sham group). A third group of subjects did not receive any magnets (no-treatment group). You should note here that this study is an example of what we call a   double-blind study . In other words, neither the subjects nor the experimenter who was working with the subjects knew who got the genuine magnets. The use of the wristbands with the magnets removed is called a   placebo treatment   condition (the word   placebo   comes from the Latin meaning “I shall please”). Placebo treatment conditions en- able experimenters to control for the possibility that simply believing one is getting an effective type of treatment pro- duces a therapeutic benefit. Finally, the no-treatment control group enables the experimenters to see what happens when they do not provide any treatment (or expectation of treat- ment) at all. At the start of the study, all of the student participants com- pleted a 4-minute typing test. This provided a measure of how many words they could type in this time period. Then, 30 minutes after wearing the magnets or fake wristbands (or, for the no-treatment subjects, after waiting 30 minutes), all par- ticipants completed another 4-minute typing test. In addition, those who had been assigned to either the genuine or the placebo magnet group were asked to rate their degree of pain relief (from no improvement to complete relief) using an 8-point scale. What were the results? As might be expected, those people who had been assigned to the no-treatment group did not report that their level of pain changed in any appreciable way. This is hardly surprising because nothing had been done to them at all. They typed an average of about four more words on the second test (the posttest) than on the first (the pretest). Did the people who wore the magnets do better than this? The answer is yes. Those who wore the genuine magnets reported that their pain was diminished. They also typed an average of 19 more words on the second typing test than they had on the first! In other words, with respect to both their self-report data (their pain improvement ratings) and their behavioral data (how rapidly they could type), they clearly did better than the no-treatment group. Before you rush out to buy magnetic bracelets, however, let us look at the performance of the people who received the fake bracelets. Like the subjects who wore the genuine magnets, these participants also reported that their pain had improved. And, in fact, on the behavioral typing test, subjects in the pla- cebo treatment group typed even more words on the second test (an average of 26 more words) than subjects who wore the real magnets did. With respect to their self-reports and their behavioral data, therefore, the group who wore the fake brace- lets improved just as much as the group who wore the real magnets! On the basis of this study, then, we must conclude that magnet therapy works via the placebo effect, not because there is any genuine clinical benefit that comes from the mag- nets themselves. If you believe that the magnet will help your RSI, you do not actually need a magnet to bring about any clinical improvement. And this, in a nutshell, is why we need controlled research trials.
Kris   Kris was a 19-year-old female with severe intellec- tual impairments. Since the age of 3 she had pulled her hair out. This disorder is called trichotillomania (pronounced tri-ko-til-lo- mania). Kris’s hair pulling was so severe that she had a bald area on her scalp that was approximately 2.5 inches in diameter. The researchers used an ABAB experimental design (see Figure 1.4) to test a treatment for reducing Kris’s hair pulling. In each phase, they used a video camera to observe Kris while she was alone in her room watching television. During the baseline phase (phase A), observers measured the percentage of time that Kris spent either touching or manipulating her hair (42.5% of the time) as well as pulling hair (7.6% of the time). In the treatment phase (B), a 2.5-lb weight was put around Kris’s wrist when she settled down to watch television. When she was wearing the wrist weight, Kris’s hair manipulation and hair pulling was reduced to zero. This, of course, suggested that Kris’s behavior had changed because she was wearing a weight on her wrist. To verify this, the wrist weight was withdrawn in the second A phase (i.e., ABA). Kris immediately started to touch and manipulate her hair again (55.9%). She also showed an increase in hair pulling (4% of the time). When the wrist weight was reintroduced in the second B phase (ABAB), Kris’s hair manipulation and pulling once again decreased, at least for a while. Although additional treatments were necessary (see Rapp et al., 2000), Kris’s hair pulling was eventually eliminated entirely. Most important for our discus- sion, the ABAB design allowed the researchers to systemati- cally explore, using experimental techniques and methods, the treatment approaches that might be beneficial for patients with trichotillomania.  Animal Research  An additional way in which we can use the experimental method is by conducting research with animals. Although ethi- cal considerations are still critical in animal research, we are able to perform studies using animal subjects that would not be possible to implement with humans (giving them experimental drugs, implanting electrodes to record brain activity, etc.). Of course, one major assumption is that the findings from animal studies can be generalized to humans. Experiments of this kind are generally known as   analogue studies , in which we study not the true item of interest but an approximation to it. Analogue studies may also involve humans (e.g., when we try to study depression by studying healthy research participants whom we have made mildly and transiently sad). One current model of depression, called “hopelessness depression,” has its origins in early research conducted with animals (Seligman, 1975). Laboratory experiments with dogs had demonstrated that, when subjected to repeated experi- ences of painful, unpredictable, and inescapable electric shock, the dogs lost their ability to learn a simple escape response to avoid further shock in a different situation later on. They just sat and endured the pain. This observation led Seligman and his colleagues to argue that human depression (which he believed was analogous to the reaction of the helpless dogs) is a reaction to uncontrollable stressful events in which one’s behavior has no effect on one’s environment, leading to help- lessness, passivity, and depression. In other words, the findings from these animal studies provided the impetus for what first  Base- line  2.5 -lb weights  2.5- lb weights  10   20   30   40  Percentage of time manipulating hair Treatment sessions A   B A e s a h P   B  Baseline Hair manipulation  80 60 40 20 0 100  figure   1.4  An ABAB Experimental Design: Kris’s Treatment.   In the A phase, baseline data are col- lected. In the B phase, a treatment is introduced. This treatment is then withdrawn (second A phase) and then reinstated (second B phase). In this ex- ample, hair manipulation declines with use of wrist weights, returns to pretreatment (baseline) levels when they are withdrawn, and declines again when they are reintroduced.   (Data adapted from Rapp et al., 2000. Treatment of hair pulling and hair manipulation main- tained by digital-tactile stimulation.   Behavior Therapy , 31, pp. 381–93)
became known as the “learned helplessness theory of depres- sion” (Abramson et al., 1978; Seligman, 1975) and is now termed “the hopelessness theory of depression” (Abramson et al., 1989). These theories of depression are not without their difficulties. Nevertheless, it is useful to remain aware of the broader message: Even though problems may arise when we generalize too readily from animal to human models of psychopathology, the learned helplessness analogy has gener- ated much research and has allowed us to refine and develop our understanding of depression.  in review  •   How is experimental research different from correlational research?  •   What is the difference between a positive and a negative correlation? If two variables are correlated, does this mean that one variable causes the other? If so, why? If not, why not?  •   In experimental research, which variable (independent or depen- dent) is manipulated?  •   What is a placebo?  •   Explain the process of performing an ABAB design. Why are such designs helpful to clinicians and researchers?  UnreSolved issues  Are We All Becoming Mentally Ill? The Expanding Horizons of Mental Disorder  T he concept of mental disorder, as we have seen, suffers from the lack of a truly objective means of determining what is disordered and what is not. Moreover, inclusion of a disorder in the   DSM   is a prerequisite for health insurers’ re- imbursement of services rendered. It is therefore in the financial interests of mental health professionals to be more and more inclusive concerning the kinds of problems that might be re- garded as “mentally disordered.” Not surprisingly, there is often pressure to include in the   DSM   more and more kinds of socially undesirable behavior. The   DSM   has been growing in size for many years as new dis- orders are added. But it is the interests of the public at large to keep a close eye on proposed expansions of what is considered “mentally disordered.” Failure to do so could eventually lead to a situation in which much of human behavior—save for the most bland, conformist, and conventional of conduct—would be declared a manifestation of a mental disorder. For example, when   DSM-5   was being developed, some groups lobbied for “apathy syndrome” and “parental alienation syndrome” to be considered as new disorders. But is being unmotivated or having a troubled relationship with your parents really a disorder? In the end, these proposals were rejected. Accepted into   DSM-5 , however, were several newly proposed disorders that might still cause some to raise an eyebrow. These include “caffeine use disorder” and “Internet gaming disorder.” These have been added to   DSM-5   in a special section that is reserved for disorders still in need of further study. Although this does not mean that they are being formally accepted as official disorders, it is certainly a first step. What do you think of this? How close do you think we are getting to the point where all of us, by virtue of drinking too much coffee or spending too much time gaming are at risk of being considered mentally ill?  Internet gaming disorder will appear in   DSM-5   as a new disorder in need of further study.  Animal research allows behavioral scientists to manipulate and study behavior under controlled conditions that would not be possible to replicate using humans as subjects. However, results of this research may not hold up when extended to humans outside the laboratory in a real-world setting.
 key terms  ABAB design   24  abnormal psychology   2  acute   14  analogue studies   25  bias   15  case study   15  chronic   14  comorbidity   13  comparison or control group   18  correlation   19  correlational research   19  correlation coefficient   19  criterion group   18  dependent variable   22  direct observation   16  direction of effect problem   22  double-blind study   24  effect size   20  epidemiology   12  etiology   14  experimental research   22  external validity   18  family aggregation   2  generalizability   15  hypothesis   17  incidence   12  independent variable   22  internal validity   18  labeling   8  lifetime prevalence   12  longitudinal design   22  meta-analysis   21  negative correlation   19  nomenclature   7  1-year prevalence   12  placebo treatment   24  point prevalence   12  positive correlation   19  prevalence   12  prospective research   22  random assignment   22  retrospective research   21  sampling   18  self-report data   15  single-case research design   23  statistical significance   19  stereotyping   8  stigma   8  third variable problem   21  1.1   How do we define abnormality and classify   mental disorders ?  •   A precise definition of   abnormality   remains elusive. Elements that can be helpful in considering whether something is abnormal include suffering, maladaptiveness, statistical deviancy, dangerous- ness, violation of societal norms, irrationality, and unpredictability.  •   The   DSM   employs a category type of classification similar to that used in medicine. Disorders are regarded as discrete clinical entities, though not all clinical disorders may be best considered in this way.  •   Even though it is not without problems, the   DSM   provides us with working criteria that help clinicians and researchers identify and study specific difficulties that affect the lives of many people. It is far from a “finished product.” However, familiarity with the  DSM   is essential to significant study of the field.  •   Culture shapes the presentation of clinical disorders in some cases. There are also certain disorders that appear to be highly culture specific.  1.2   What are the advantages and disadvantages of classification?  •   Classifying disorders provides a communication shorthand and allows us to structure information in an efficient manner. This facilitates research and treatment. However, when we classify, we lose personal information about the person with the disorder. Classification also facilitates stigma, stereotyping, and labeling.  •   People with mental disorders experience a great deal of stigma. Even though it is now generally known that mental illnesses have biological causes, this does not seem to have reduced the stigma associated with being mentally ill. Negative attitudes toward the mentally ill can be found in all cultures.  1.3   How common are mental disorders? Which disorders are most prevalent?  •   Epidemiology involves the study of the distribution and frequency of disorders. Just under 50 percent of people will experience some form of mental disorder over the course of their lifetimes. Mood disorders and anxiety disorders are particularly common.  1.4   Why do we need a research-based approach in abnormal psychology?  •   Research in abnormal psychology allows us to learn about the dura- tion and causes of disorders and this research can take place in a variety of settings including clinics, hospitals, schools, and prisons.  •   To avoid misconception and error, we must adopt a scientific approach to the study of abnormal behavior. This requires a focus on research and research methodology, including an appreciation of the distinction between what is observable and what is hypo- thetical or inferred.  •   To produce valid results, research must be conducted on indi- viduals who are truly representative of the diagnostic groups to which they purportedly belong.  1.5   How do we gather information about mental disorders?  •   Information about mental disorders is gathered by psychologists through case studies, self-report data, and observational approaches.  1.6   What kinds of research designs are used to conduct research in abnormal psychology?  •   Research in abnormal psychology may be correlational or experi- mental. Correlational research examines factors as they currently are. Experimental research involves manipulating one variable (the independent variable) and observing the effect this manipulation produces with regard to another variable (the dependent variable).  •   Just because two variables are correlated does not mean that there is a causal relationship between them. Always remember that cor- relation does not equal causation.  •   Although most experiments involve the study of groups, single- case experimental designs (e.g., ABAB designs) may also be used to make causal inferences in individual instances.  •   Analogue studies (e.g., animal research) are studies that provide an approximation to the human disorders of interest. Although generalizability presents an obstacle, animal research in particular has been very informative.  1   summary
learning objectives  2.1  How has abnormal behavior been viewed throughout history?  2.2  What effect did the emergence of humanism have on abnormal psychology?  2.3  What developments led to the contemporary view of abnormal psychology?  An Artist in Bedlam   The most famous patient commit- ted to the historic Bethlem Hospital in England (better known as Bedlam) during its long existence was a well-known and talented young artist, Richard Dadd (1817–1886). Dadd was born in Chatham, England, in 1817. His father was a successful chemist. Dadd attended the Kings School in Rochester and also studied art at the Royal Academy School in London. He showed a strong apti- tude for drawing and painting and was admitted to the prestigious Royal Academy of Arts at the early age of 20. When he was 25, he was invited to accompany Sir Thomas Phillips, the former mayor of Newport, on a grand tour through Europe, Greece, Turkey, Syria, and Egypt to serve as the draftsman and painter for the expedi- tion. During the trip, Dadd produced a number of exceptional paintings of people and places he encountered on the journey, many of which are in museums today. The journey was reportedly difficult and stressful, and at one point, during a trip up the Nile River, Dadd underwent a remarkable personality change, becom- ing delusional and increasingly aggressive and violent toward peo- ple he met. He was reported to have expressed an urge to kill the Pope. He experienced delusional beliefs—for example, that he had come under the influence of the Egyptian god Osiris. When he returned from the trip in 1843, he was diagnosed as being mentally unsound because of his hallucinations and his strange, delusional beliefs. In an effort to restore him to health, his family took him to recuperate in a countryside village in Kent, England. The records indicate that one day he came to the con- clusion that his father was the Devil in disguise, and on a walk in the countryside Dadd killed his father with a knife. He attempted to escape by fleeing to France; however, his aggressive behavior continued, and he attempted to kill another tourist with a razor. He was arrested by the police and was eventually returned to England. He was committed to Bethlem Royal Hospital, where he was held in the criminal ward for dangerous inmates. He remained in Bethlem Hospital for almost 20 years but was trans- ferred to Broadmoor Hospital, where he died in 1886. During his stay in both the Bethlem and Broadmoor hospitals he was allowed and encouraged to paint by the staff as part of his treat- ment. During this time he produced a number of paintings, many of which can be seen today in art museums. Although he appears to have experienced symptoms of a mood disorder including acute mania (see Chapter 7) it is likely that Dadd suffered from paranoid schizophrenia (see  4 for further discussion). Interestingly, two of his siblings appeared to suffer from the same symptom pattern; thus he may have been genetically predisposed to this condition (see Greysmith, 1979; MacGregor, 1989 for a discussion of his life and art work).  Historical Views of Abnormal Behavior  Our historical efforts to understand abnormal psychology include both humor and tragedy. In this chapter, we will high- light some views of psychopathology, and some of the treat- ments administered, from ancient times to the twenty-first century. In a broad sense, we will see a progression of beliefs from what we now consider superstition to those based on scientific awareness—from a focus on supernatural explanations to knowledge of natural causes. The course of this evolution has at times been marked by periods of advancement or unique, individual contributions, followed by long years of inactivity or unproductive, backward steps. Although human life appeared on earth some 3 million or more years ago, written records extend back only a few thousand years. Thus our knowledge of our early ancestors is limited. Two Egyptian papyri dating from the sixteenth century b.c. provide some clues to the earliest treatments of diseases and behavior disorders (Okasha & Okasha, 2000). The Edwin Smith papyrus (named after its nineteenth-century discoverer) contains detailed descriptions of the treatment of wounds and other surgical operations. In it, the brain is described—possibly for the first time in history—and the writing clearly shows that the brain was recognized as the site of mental functions. The Ebers papyrus offers another perspective on treatment. It covers internal medi- cine and the circulatory system but relies more on incantations and magic for explaining and curing diseases that had unknown causes. Although surgical techniques may have been used, they were probably coupled with prayers and the like, which reflected the prevailing view of the origin of mental illness.  Demonology, Gods, and Magic  References to abnormal behavior in early writings show that the Chinese, Egyptians, Hebrews, and Greeks often attributed such behavior to a demon or god who had taken possession of a person. Whether the “possession” was assumed to involve good spirits or evil spirits usually depended on the affected individual’s  2
symptoms. If a person’s speech or behavior appeared to have a religious or mystical significance, it was usually thought that he or she was possessed by a good spirit or god. Such people were often treated with considerable awe and respect, for people believed they had supernatural powers. Most possessions, however, were considered to be the work of an angry god or an evil spirit, particularly when a person became excited or overactive and engaged in behavior contrary to religious teachings. Among the ancient Hebrews, for example, such possessions were thought to represent the wrath and pun- ishment of God. Moses is quoted in the Bible as saying, “The Lord shall smite thee with madness.” Apparently this punish- ment was thought to involve the withdrawal of God’s protection and the abandonment of the person to the forces of evil. In such cases, every effort was made to rid the person of the evil spirit. The primary type of treatment for demonic possession was exorcism, which included various techniques for casting an evil spirit out of an afflicted person. These techniques varied but typically included magic, prayer, incantation, noisemaking, and the use of horrible-tasting concoctions made from sheep’s dung and wine.  Hippocrates’ Early Medical Concepts  The Greek temples of healing ushered in the Golden Age of Greece under the Athenian leader Pericles (461–429 b.c.). This period saw considerable progress in the understanding and treat- ment of mental disorders, in spite of the fact that Greeks of the time considered the human body sacred so little could be learned of human anatomy or physiology. During this period the Greek physician Hippocrates (460–377 b.c.), often referred to as the father of modern medicine, received his training and made sub- stantial contributions to the field. Hippocrates denied that deities and demons intervened in the development of illnesses and instead insisted that mental disorders, like other diseases, had natural causes and appropriate treatments. He believed that the brain was the central organ of intellectual activity and that mental disorders were due to brain pathology. He also emphasized the importance of heredity and predisposition and pointed out that injuries to the head could cause sensory and motor disorders. Hippocrates classified all mental disorders into three general categories—mania, melancholia, and phrenitis (brain fever)— and gave detailed clinical descriptions of the specific disorders included in each category. He relied heavily on clinical observa- tion, and his descriptions, which were based on daily clinical records of his patients, were surprisingly thorough. Maher and Maher (1994) pointed out that the best known of the earlier paradigms for explaining personality or tempera- ment is the doctrine of the four humors, associated with the name of Hippocrates and later with the Roman physician Galen. The four elements of the material world were thought to be earth, air, fire, and water, which had attributes of heat, cold, moistness, and dryness. These elements combined to form the four essential fluids of the body—blood (sanguis), phlegm, bile (choler), and black bile (melancholer). The fluids combined in different proportions within different individuals, and a person’s temperament was determined by which of the humors was dom- inant. From this view came one of the earliest and longest-lasting typologies of human behavior: the sanguine, the phlegmatic, the choleric, and the melancholic. Each of these “types” brought with it a set of personality attributes. For example, the person of sanguine temperament was optimistic, cheerful, and unafraid. Hippocrates considered dreams to be important in under- standing a patient’s personality. On this point, he was a harbin- ger of a basic concept of modern psychodynamic psychotherapy. The treatments advocated by Hippocrates were far in advance of the exorcistic practices then prevalent. For the treatment of mel- ancholia (see Developments in Thinking on p. 31), for example, he prescribed a regular and tranquil life, sobriety and abstinence from all excesses, a vegetable diet, celibacy, exercise short of fatigue, and bleeding if indicated. He also recognized the impor- tance of the environment and often removed his patients from their families. Hippocrates’ emphasis on the natural causes of diseases, on clinical observation, and on brain pathology as the root of men- tal disorders was truly revolutionary. Like his contemporaries, however, Hippocrates had little knowledge of physiology. He believed that hysteria (the appearance of physical illness in the absence of organic pathology) was restricted to women and was caused by the uterus wandering to various parts of the body, pin- ing for children. For this “disease,” Hippocrates recommended marriage as the best remedy.  Hippocrates’ (460–377   b   .c .) belief that mental disease was the result of natural causes and brain pathology was revolutionary for its time.
The earliest use of the concept “delirium” to describe symp- toms of mental disorders that result from fever or physical injury or brain trauma occurred in the first century a.d. by Celsus (Adamis et al., 2007).  Early Philosophical Conceptions of Consciousness  The Greek philosopher Plato (429–347 b.c.) studied mentally disturbed individuals who had committed criminal acts and how to deal with them. He wrote that such persons were, in some “obvious” sense, not responsible for their acts and should not receive punishment in the same way as normal persons. He also made provision for mental cases to be cared for in the community (Plato, n.d.). Plato viewed psychological phenomena as responses of the whole organism, reflecting its internal state and natural appetites. In   The Republic , Plato emphasized the importance of individual differences in intellectual and other abilities and took into account sociocultural influences in shaping thinking and behavior. His ideas regarding treatment included a provi- sion for “hospital” care for individuals who developed beliefs that ran counter to those of the broader social order. There they would be engaged periodically in conversations comparable  developments in THINKING  Melancholia Through the Ages  A lthough the modern mental health sciences have made great strides in defining, describing, classifying, de- termining the causes of, and treating psychological disorders, we should not ignore or minimize the contributions to understanding these conditions that were made by many individuals in antiquity. Actually, some mental health problems that are receiving a great deal of research and clinical attention today have been recognized and well described for millennia. One recent study of surviving letters from patients who were hospitalized in Edinborough Asylum between 1873 and 1906 concluded that mental health problems in the nineteenth cen- tury were very similar to those in our day (Beveridge, 1997). One such disorder is depression.  Melancholia  Perhaps no other mental disorder received so much attention from earlier scholars as depression, or (as it has been referred to in the past) melancholia. Efforts to understand melancholia have been undertaken by physicians, philosophers, writers, painters, and religious leaders in Western civilization for over 2,000 years. Moreover, conditions similar to depression are described in surviving writings from ancient Egypt (Okasha & Okasha, 2000). These disorders might have been viewed variously as medical conditions or religious states or human frailties; however, the symptom structure and behavior described were unmistakable. Radden (2000) published an interesting compendium of impor- tant writings on melancholia that span 24 centuries, some high- lights of which are provided here.  • Investigations into the nature of depression, beginning with  Aristotle and Galen during the Greek and Roman eras, pro- vide lucid descriptions of the disorder melancholia.  • Even in the Middle Ages, when scholarship and inquiry were  hindered by religious persecution that included the Spanish Inquisition, there were scholars interested in mental states such as melancholia. Hildegard (1098–1179), a nun known as the “first published woman physician,” carried the Greek views of melancholia further by noting, among other things, that melancholia took different forms in men and women. Johann Weyer (1515–1588) provided astute descriptions of melancho- lia and examined characteristics of persons who might be so affected, even though these observations were often couched in terms of demonic possession—perhaps as a concession to leaders of the Inquisition in order to avoid persecution.  • The premodern view of melancholia as a disorder (without the  taint of demonic possession or ancient Greek humors) was introduced by Philippe Pinel (1745–1826). A French physician widely recognized for his contributions to the humane treat- ment of people with mental disorders, Pinel also advanced our scholarly understanding of mental disorders such as mel- ancholia by improving a classification schema and examining the causes of the disorder.  • Two early modern contributors to our understanding of  depression were Wilhelm Griesinger (1817–1868) and Emil Kraepelin (1856–1926). Griesinger’s views on the underlying biological basis for disorders such as melancholia focused the field of psychiatry on the need to seek biological determinants for disorders. Kraepelin is credited with preparing the way for the modern view of psychiatry. His classification schema is still cited today in contemporary writings as seminal in the evolu- tion of diagnostic classification systems. He also identified manic depression as a major category of depression. Even though much of our understanding of depression and our development of effective treatment methods has emerged over the past three decades, our debt to the ancients who struggled with describing and understanding this disorder needs to be recognized.
to psychotherapy to promote the health of their souls (Milns, 1986). Despite these modern ideas, however, Plato shared the belief that mental disorders were in part divinely caused. The celebrated Greek philosopher Aristotle (384–322 b.c.), who was a pupil of Plato, wrote extensively on mental disorders. Among his most lasting contributions to psychology are his descriptions of consciousness. He held the view that “thinking” as directed would eliminate pain and help to attain pleasure. On the question of whether mental disorders could be caused by psycho- logical factors such as frustration and conflict, Aristotle discussed the possibility and rejected it; his lead on this issue was widely fol- lowed. Aristotle generally subscribed to the Hippocratic theory of disturbances in the bile. For example, he thought that very hot bile generated amorous desires, verbal fluency, and suicidal impulses.  Later Greek and Roman Thought  Hippocrates’ work was continued by some of the later Greek and Roman physicians. Particularly in Alexandria, Egypt (which became a center of Greek culture after its founding in 332 b.c. by Alexander the Great), medical practices developed to a higher level, and the temples dedicated to Saturn were first-rate sanato- ria. Pleasant surroundings were considered of great therapeutic value for mental patients, who were provided with constant activities including parties, dances, walks in the temple gardens, rowing along the Nile, and musical concerts. Physicians of this time also used a wide range of therapeutic measures including dieting, massage, hydrotherapy, gymnastics, and education, as well as some less desirable practices such as bleeding, purging, and mechanical restraints. Asclepiades (c. 124–40 b.c.) was a Greek physician born at Prusa in Bithynia in Asia Minor and practiced medicine in Rome toward the end of the second century b.c. He developed a theory of disease that was based on the flow of atoms through the pores in the body and developed treatments, such as massage, special diets, bathing, exercise, listening to music, and rest and quiet, to restore to the body (Stone, 1937). One of the most influential Greek physicians was Galen (a.d. 130–200), who practiced in Rome. Although he elabo- rated on the Hippocratic tradition, he did not contribute much that was new to the treatment or clinical descriptions of mental disorders. Rather, he made a number of original contributions concerning the anatomy of the nervous system. (These find- ings were based on dissections of animals; human autopsies were still not allowed.) Galen also took a scientific approach to the field, dividing the causes of psychological disorders into physical and mental categories. Among the causes he named were injuries to the head, excessive use of alcohol, shock, fear, adolescence, menstrual changes, economic reversals, and disap- pointment in love. Roman medicine reflected the characteristic pragmatism of the Roman people. Roman physicians wanted to make their patients comfortable and thus used pleasant physical therapies such as warm baths and massage. They also followed the princi- ple of contrariis contrarius ( “opposite by opposite”   )—for example, having their patients drink chilled wine while they were in a warm tub.  Early Views of Mental Disorders in China  China was one of the earliest developed civilizations in which medicine and attention to mental disorders were introduced (Soong, 2006). The following passage is taken from an ancient Chinese medical text supposedly written by Huang Ti (c. 2674 b.c.), the third legendary emperor.  The person suffering from excited insanity initially feels sad, eating and sleeping less; he then becomes grandiose, feeling that he is very smart and noble, talking and scolding day and night, singing, behaving strangely, seeing strange things, hearing strange voices, believing that he can see the devil or gods. (Tseng, 1973, p. 570)  Even at this early date, Chinese medicine was based on a belief in natural rather than supernatural causes for illnesses. For example, in the concept of yin and yang, the human body, like the cosmos, is divided into positive and negative forces that both complement and contradict each other. If the two forces are balanced, the result is physical and mental health; if they are not, illness results. Thus treatments focused on restoring balance (Tseng, 1973, p. 570).  Galen ( a.d . 130–200) believed that psychological disorders could have either physical causes, such as injuries to the head, or mental causes, such as disappointment in love.
Chinese medicine reached a relatively sophisticated level during the second century, and Chung Ching, who has been called the Hippocrates of China, wrote two well-known medical works around a.d. 200. Like Hippocrates, he based his views of physical and mental disorders on clinical observations, and he implicated organ pathologies as primary causes. However, he also believed that stressful psychological conditions could cause organ pathologies, and his treatments, like those of Hippocrates, uti- lized both drugs and the regaining of emotional balance through appropriate activities. As in the West, Chinese views of mental disorders regressed to a belief in supernatural forces as causal agents. From the later part of the second century through the early part of the ninth century, ghosts and devils were implicated in “ghost-evil” insanity, which presumably resulted from possession by evil spirits. The “Dark Ages” in China, however, were neither so severe (in terms of the treatment of mental patients) nor as long-lasting as in the West. A return to biological, somatic (bodily) views and an emphasis on psychosocial factors occurred in the centuries that followed. Over the past 50 years, China has been experiencing a broadening of ideas in mental health services and has been incorporating many ideas from Western psychiatry (Zhang & Lu, 2006).  Views of Abnormality During the Middle Ages  During the Middle Ages (about a.d. 500 to a.d. 1500), the more scientific aspects of Greek medicine survived in the Islamic countries of the Middle East. The first mental hospital was established in Baghdad in a.d. 792; it was soon followed by oth- ers in Damascus and Aleppo (Polvan, 1969). In these hospitals, mentally disturbed individuals received humane treatment. One outstanding figure in ancient medicine was Avicenna from Persia (c. 980–1037), called the “prince of physicians” (Campbell, 1926), and the author of   The Canon of Medicine , perhaps the most widely studied medical work ever written. In his writ- ings, Avicenna frequently referred to hysteria, epilepsy, manic reactions, and melancholia. The following case study illustrates Avicenna’s unique approach to the treatment of a young prince suffering from mental disorder.  An Early Treatment Case   A certain prince was afflicted with melancholia and suffered from the delusion that he was a cow. . . . He would low like a cow, causing annoyance to everyone, . . . crying, “Kill me so that a good stew may be made of my flesh.” Finally . . . he would eat nothing. . . . Avicenna was persuaded to take the case. . . . First of all he sent a message to the patient bidding him be of good cheer because the butcher was coming to slaughter him, whereat . . . the sick man rejoiced. Some time afterward Avicenna, holding a knife in his hand, entered the sickroom saying, “Where is this cow that I may kill it?” The patient lowed like a cow to indicate where he was. By Avicenna’s orders he was laid on the ground bound hand and foot. Avicenna then felt him all over and said, “He is too lean, and not ready to be killed; he must be fattened.” Then they offered him suitable food of which he now partook eagerly, and gradually he gained strength, got rid of his delusion, and was completely cured. (Browne, 1921, pp. 88–89)  During the Middle Ages in Europe, scientific inquiry into abnormal behavior was limited, and the treatment of psychologi- cally disturbed individuals was characterized more often by ritual or superstition than by attempts to understand an individual’s condition. In contrast to Avicenna’s era in the Islamic countries of the Middle East or to the period of enlightenment during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Middle Ages in Europe were largely devoid of scientific thinking and humane treatment for the mentally disturbed. Mental disorders were quite prevalent throughout the Middle Ages in Europe, especially toward the end of the period, when medieval institutions, social structures, and beliefs began to change drastically. During this time, supernatural explana- tions of the causes of mental illness grew in popularity. Within this environment, it obviously was difficult to make great strides in the understanding and treatment of abnormal behavior. Although the influence of theology was growing rapidly, “sin” was not always cited as a causal factor in mental illness. For example, Kroll and Bachrach (1984) examined 57 episodes of mental illness ranging from madness and possession to alcohol abuse and epilepsy. They found sin implicated in only nine cases (16%). To understand better this elusive period of history, let us look at two events of the times—mass madness and exorcism—to see how they are related to views of abnormal behavior.  MAss MADnEss   During the last half of the Middle Ages in Europe, a peculiar trend emerged in efforts to understand ab- normal behavior. It involved   mass madness —the widespread  Ancient Persian physician Avicenna (c. 980–1037) approached the treatment of mental disorders with humane practices unknown to Western medical practitioners of the time.
occurrence of group behavior disorders that were apparently cases of hysteria. Whole groups of people were affected simulta- neously. Dancing manias (epidemics of raving, jumping, danc- ing, and convulsions) were reported as early as the tenth century. One such episode that occurred in Italy early in the thirteenth century was known as   tarantism —a disorder that included an uncontrollable impulse to dance that was often attributed to the bite of the southern European tarantula or wolf spider. This dancing mania later spread to Germany and the rest of Europe, where it was known as   Saint Vitus’s dance . Isolated rural areas were also afflicted with outbreaks of  lycanthropy —a condition in which people believed themselves to be possessed by wolves and imitated their behavior. In 1541 a case was reported in which a person suffering from lycanthropy told his captors, in confidence, that he was really a wolf but that his skin was smooth on the surface because all the hairs were on the inside (Stone, 1937). To cure him of his delusions, his extremities were amputated, following which he died, still uncured. Mass madness occurred periodically all the way into the sev- enteenth century but had reached its peak during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries—a period noted for social oppression, famine, and epidemic diseases. During this time, Europe was ravaged by a plague known as the Black Death, which killed millions (according to some estimates, 50% of the population of Europe died) and severely disrupted social organization. Undoubtedly, many of the peculiar cases of mass madness were related to the depression, fear, and wild mysticism engendered by the terrible events of this period. People simply could not believe that frightening catastrophes such as the Black Death could have natural causes and thus could be within their power to control, prevent, or even create. Today, so-called mass hysteria occurs occasionally; the affliction usually mimics some type of physical disorder such as fainting spells or convulsive movements. A case of apparent mass hysteria occurred among hundreds of West Bank Palestinian girls in April 1983. This episode threatened to have serious political repercussions because some Arab leaders initially thought that the girls had been poisoned by Israelis. Health officials later con- cluded that psychological factors had played a key role in most of the cases (Hefez, 1985). Ilechukwu (1992) describes an epidemic of mass hysteria that occurred in Nigeria in 1990 in which many men feared that their genitals had simply vanished. This fear of genital retraction accompanied by a fear of death is referred to as  koro   and has been widely documented in Southeast Asia. The afflicted persons believe this genital disappearance was caused by a supernatural occurrence in which they were robbed of their genitalia in order to benefit other people magically. Ilechukwu attributes some of this panic to male resentment of women’s success during a period of social strain and the symbolic equa- tion between masculine sexuality and economic, social, and creative prowess.  ExoRCisM AnD WiTCHCRAfT   In the Middle Ages in Europe, management of the mentally disturbed was left largely to the clergy. Monasteries served as refuges and places of confinement. During the early part of the medieval period, the mentally dis- turbed were, for the most part, treated with considerable kind- ness. “Treatment” consisted of prayer, holy water, sanctified ointments, the breath or spittle of the priests, the touching of relics, visits to holy places, and mild forms of exorcism. In some monasteries and shrines,   exorcisms   were performed by the gen- tle “laying on of hands.” Such methods were often joined with vaguely understood medical treatments derived mainly from Galen, which gave rise to prescriptions such as the following: “For a fiend-sick man: When a devil possesses a man, or controls him from within with disease, a spewdrink of lupin, bishop- swort, henbane, garlic. Pound these together, add ale and holy water” (Cockayne, 1864–1866). Interestingly, there has been a recent resurgence of supersti- tion. For example, one can find those who believe that supernat- ural forces cause psychological problems and that “cures” should involve exorcism to rid people of unwanted characteristics or “spells.” Fries (2001) reported on a woman tragically drowning her 4-year-old daughter in an exorcism ritual attempting to rid her of demons that the mother believed possessed her daughter. In a more recent example, CBS News reported an incident in which an autistic boy was killed in an exorcism at a church in Milwaukee (CBS News, 2003). It had long been thought that during the Middle Ages many mentally disturbed people were accused of being witches and thus were punished and often killed (e.g., Zilboorg & Henry, 1941). But several more recent interpretations have questioned the extent to which this was so (Maher & Maher, 1985; Phillips, 2002; Schoeneman, 1984). For example, in a review of the liter- ature, Schoeneman (1984) notes that “the typical accused witch was not a mentally ill person but an impoverished woman with a sharp tongue and a bad temper” (p. 301). He goes on to say that “witchcraft was, in fact, never considered a variety of pos- session either by witch hunters, the general populace, or modern historians” (p. 306). To say “never” may be overstating the case; clearly, some mentally ill people were punished as witches. Otherwise, as we will see in the next section, why did some physicians and thinkers go to great lengths to expose the fallacies of the connection? In the case of witchcraft and mental illness, the confusion may be due, in part, to confusion about demonic possession. Even Robert Burton (1576–1640), an enlightened scholar, in his classic work   The Anatomy of Melancholia   (1621), considered demonic possession a potential cause of mental dis- order. There were two types of demonically possessed people: Those physically possessed were considered mad, whereas those spiritually possessed were likely to be considered witches. Over time, the distinctions between these two categories may have blurred in the eyes of historians, resulting in the perception that witchcraft and mental illness were connected more frequently in the medieval mind than was the case.
The changing view of the relationship between witchcraft and mental illness points to an even broader issue—the difficul- ties of interpreting historical events accurately. We will discuss this concept in more depth in the Unresolved Issues section at the end of this chapter.  in review  •   What aspects of Hippocrates’ alternative approach to mental disorders were truly revolutionary?  •   What were the historical views of the disorder of melancholia (known as depression today)?  •   What was the role of supernatural beliefs in efforts to under- stand mental disorders during the Middle Ages?  •   What is mass madness? Give some examples of this phenomenon.  Toward Humanitarian Approaches  During the latter part of the Middle Ages and the early Renaissance, scientific questioning reemerged and a movement emphasizing the importance of specifically human interests and concerns began—a movement (still with us today) that can be loosely referred to as humanism. Consequently, the superstitious beliefs that had hindered the understanding and therapeutic treatment of mental disorders began to be challenged.  The Resurgence of scientific Questioning in Europe  Paracelsus (1490–1541), a Swiss physician, was an early critic of superstitious beliefs about possession. He insisted that the dancing mania was not a possession but a form of disease, and that it should be treated as such. He also postulated a conflict between the instinctual and spiritual natures of human beings, formulated the idea of psychic causes for mental illness, and advocated treatment by “bodily magnetism,” later called hyp- nosis (Mora, 1967). Although Paracelsus rejected demonology, his view of abnormal behavior was colored by his belief in astral influences ( lunatic   is derived from the Latin word luna, or “moon”). He was convinced that the moon exerted a supernatu- ral influence over the brain—an idea, incidentally, that persists among some people today. Johann Weyer (1515–1588), a German physician and writer who wrote under the Latin name of Joannus Wierus, was so deeply disturbed by the imprisonment, torture, and burning of people accused of witchcraft that he made a care- ful study of the entire problem. About 1583 he published a book,   On the Deceits of the Demons , that contains a step-by- step rebuttal of the   Malleus Maleficarum , a witch-hunting handbook published in 1486 for use in recognizing and dealing with those suspected of being witches. In his book, Weyer argued that a considerable number, if not all, of those imprisoned, tortured, and burned for witchcraft were really sick in mind or body and that, consequently, great wrongs were being committed against innocent people. Weyer’s work enjoyed the approval of a few outstanding physicians and theo- logians of his time. Mostly, however, it met with vehement protest and condemnation. Weyer was one of the first physicians to specialize in mental disorders, and his wide experience and progressive views jus- tify his reputation as the founder of modern psychopathology. Unfortunately, however, he was too far ahead of his time. He was scorned by his peers, many of whom called him “Weirus Hereticus” and “Weirus Insanus.” His works were banned by the Church and remained so until the twentieth century. The clergy, however, were beginning to question the prac- tices of the time. For example, St. Vincent de Paul (1576–1660), at the risk of his life, declared, “Mental disease is no different than bodily disease and Christianity demands of the humane and powerful to protect, and the skillful to relieve the one as well as the other” (Castiglioni, 1924). In the face of such persistent advocates of science, who continued their testimonies throughout the next two centuries, demonology and superstition gave ground. These advocates gradually paved the way for the return of observation and reason, which culminated in the development of modern experimental and clinical approaches.  The Establishment of Early Asylums  From the sixteenth century on, special institutions called  asylums —sanctuaries or places of refuge meant solely for the care of the mentally ill—grew in number. The early asylums were begun as a way of removing from society troublesome individuals  Johann Weyer, a sixteenth-century German physician, became so concerned over the torture and imprison- ment of people accused of being witches that he wrote a book rebutting the church’s witch- hunting handbook, the  Malleus Maleficarum.
who could not care for themselves. Although scientific inquiry into abnormal behavior was on the increase, most early asylums, often referred to as “madhouses,” were not pleasant places or “hospitals” but primarily residences or storage places for the insane. The unfortunate residents lived and died amid conditions of incredible filth and cruelty. The first asylum established in Europe was probably in Spain in 1409 (Villasante, 2003), although this point has been the subject of considerable discussion (Polo, 1997; Trope, 1997). Little is known about the treatment of patients in this asylum. In 1547 the monastery of St. Mary of Bethlem in London (initially founded as a monastery in 1247; see O’Donoghue, 1914) was officially made into an asylum by Henry VIII. Its name soon was contracted to “Bedlam,” and it became widely known for its deplorable conditions and prac- tices. The more violent patients were exhibited to the public for one penny a look, and the more harmless inmates were forced to seek charity on the streets of London. Tuke (1882) describes Ned Ward’s account, in   History of the Insane in the British Isles , of a visit to Bedlam:  Accordingly we were admitted in thro’ an iron gate, within which sat a brawny Cerberus, of an Idico-colour, leaning upon a money-box; we turned in through another Iron- Barricado, where we heard such a rattling of chains, drum- ming of doors, ranting, hollowing, singing, and running, that I could think of nothing but Don Quevedo’s Vision where the lost souls broke loose and put Hell in an uproar. The first whimsey-headed wretch of this lunatic family that we observed, was a merry fellow in a straw cap, who was talking to himself, “that he had an army of Eagles at his command,” then clapping his hand upon his head, swore by his crown of moonshine, he would battle all the Stars in the Skies, but he would have some claret. . . . We then moved on till we found another remarkable figure worth our observ- ing, who was peeping through his wicket, eating of bread and cheese, talking all the while like a carrier at his supper, chewing his words with his victuals, all that he spoke being in praise of bread and cheese: “bread was good with cheese, and cheese was good with bread, and bread and cheese was good together”; and abundance of such stuff; to which my friend and I, with others stood listening; at last he counter- feits a sneeze, and shot such a mouthful of bread and cheese amongst us, that every spectator had some share of his kind- ness, which made us retreat. (pp. 76–77)  Such asylums for the mentally ill were gradually established in other countries, including Mexico (1566) and France (1641). An asylum was established in Moscow in 1764, and the notori- ous Lunatics’ Tower in Vienna was constructed in 1784. This structure was a showplace in Old Vienna, an ornately decorated round tower within which were square rooms. The doctors and “keepers” lived in the square rooms, while the patients were confined in the spaces between the walls of the rooms and the outside of the tower, where they were put on exhibit to the pub- lic for a small fee. These early asylums were primarily modifica- tions of penal institutions, and the inmates were treated more like beasts than like human beings. In the United States, the Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia, completed under the guidance of Benjamin Frank- lin in 1756, provided some cells or wards for mental patients. The Public Hospital in Williamsburg, Virginia, constructed in 1773, was the first hospital in the United States devoted exclu- sively to mental patients. The treatment of mental patients in the United States was no better than that offered by European institutions, however. Zwelling’s 1985 review of the Public Hospital’s treatment methods shows that, initially, the philoso- phy of treatment involved the belief that the patients needed to choose rationality over   insanity . Thus the treatment techniques were aggressive, aimed at restoring a “physical balance in the body and brain.” These techniques, though based on the scien- tific views of the day, were designed to intimidate patients. They included powerful drugs, water treatments, bleeding and blister- ing, electric shocks, and physical restraints. For example, a vio- lent patient might be plunged into ice water or a listless patient into hot water; frenzied patients might be administered drugs to exhaust them; or patients might be bled in order to drain their system of “harmful” fluids.  Humanitarian Reform  Clearly, by the late eighteenth century, most mental hospitals in Europe and America were in great need of reform. The humani- tarian treatment of patients received great impetus from the work of Philippe Pinel (1745–1826) in France.  PinEL ’s ExPERiMEnT   In 1792, shortly after the first phase of the French Revolution, Pinel was placed in charge of La Bicêtre, a hospital in Paris. In this capacity, he received the grudging per- mission of the Revolutionary Commune to remove the chains from some of the inmates as an experiment to test his views that mental patients should be treated with kindness and consider- ation—as sick people, not as vicious beasts or criminals. Had his experiment proved a failure, Pinel might have lost his head, but fortunately it was a great success. Chains were removed; sunny rooms were provided; patients were permitted to exercise on the hospital grounds; and kindness was extended to these poor beings, some of whom had been chained in dungeons for 30 or more years. The effect was almost miraculous. The previous noise, filth, and abuse were replaced by order and peace. Interest- ingly, a historical document, subsequently found in the French Archives, raises some question about the date at which humani- tarian reforms were begun in France. The document, provided by Jean-Baptiste Pussin (Pinel’s predecessor at La Bicêtre),
indicated that he had been the head of the hospital beginning in 1784 and had removed some of the chains from patients and employed slightly more humane straitjackets instead. He also pointed out in the document that he had issued orders forbid- ding the staff from beating patients (Weiner, 1979).  TukE’s WoRk in EnGLAnD   At about the same time that Pinel was reforming La Bicêtre, an English Quaker named William Tuke (1732–1822) established the York Retreat, a pleasant country house where mental patients lived, worked, and rested in a kindly, religious atmosphere (Narby, 1982). This retreat rep- resented the culmination of a noble battle against the brutality, ignorance, and indifference of Tuke’s time. The Quakers believed in treating all people, even the insane, with kindness and acceptance. Their view that kind acceptance would help mentally ill people recover sparked the growth of more humane psychiatric treatment during a period when mental patients were ignored and mistreated (Glover, 1984). The Quaker retreat at York has continued to provide humane mental health treatment for over 200 years (Borthwick et al., 2001), even though the mental hospital movement spawned by its example evolved into large mental hospitals that became crowded and often offered less-than-humane treatment in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. (See the picture of the York Retreat today below.) As word of Pinel’s amazing results spread to England, Tuke’s small force of Quakers gradually gained the support of English medical practitioners such as Thomas Wakley and Samuel Hitch. In 1841 Hitch introduced trained nurses into the wards at the Gloucester Asylum and put trained supervi- sors at the head of the nursing staffs. These innovations, quite revolutionary at the time, not only improved the care of mental patients but also changed public attitudes toward the mentally disturbed. In 1842, following Wakley’s lobbying for change, the Lunacy Inquiry Act was passed, which included the require- ment of effective inspection of asylums and houses every four months (Roberts, 1981) to ensure proper diet and the elimina- tion of the use of restraints. In 1845, the Country Asylums Act was passed in England, which required every county to provide asylum to “paupers and lunatics” (Scull, 1996). Britain’s policy of providing more humane treatment of the mentally ill was substantially expanded to the colonies (Australia, Canada, India, West Indies, South  This picture shows a male ward of Bethlem hospital under the new, more humane treatment approach. Walford (1878) pointed out that by 1815, there was no more “show for a penny” at Bethlem Hospital, and patients were afforded more humane living facilities and activities.  This painting depicts Philippe Pinel supervising the unchaining of inmates at La Bicêtre hospital. Pinel’s experiment represented both a great reform and a major step in devising humanitarian methods of treating mental disorders.  The historic mental health facility, the York Retreat, continues to provide services in York, England, over 200 years since it was founded by William Tuke in 1796. This mental health facility is sponsored by the Quakers and provides a broad range of services in both inpatient and outpatient care.
Africa, etc.) after a widely publicized incident of maltreatment of patients that occurred in Kingston, Jamaica prompted an audit of colonial facilities and practices. In Kingston, an article written by a former patient disclosed that the staff used “tanking” to control and punish mental patients. During tank- ing, “lunatics” were routinely held under water in a bathing tank by nurses and sometimes other patients until they were near death (Swartz, 2010).  RusH AnD MoRAL MAnAGEMEnT in AMERiCA   The suc- cess of Pinel’s and Tuke’s humanitarian experiments revolution- ized the treatment of mental patients throughout the Western world. In the United States, this revolution was reflected in the work of Benjamin Rush (1745–1813), the founder of American psychiatry and also one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence. While he was associated with the Pennsylvania Hospital in 1783, Rush encouraged more humane treatment of the mentally ill; wrote the first systematic treatise on psychiatry in America,   Medical Inquiries and Observations upon Diseases  of the Mind (1812); and was the first American to organize a course in psychiatry (see Gentile & Miller, 2009). But even he did not escape entirely from the established beliefs of his time. His medical theory was tainted with astrology, and his prin- cipal remedies were bloodletting and purgatives. In addition, he invented and used a device called “the tranquilizing chair,” which was probably more torturous than tranquil for patients. The chair was thought to lessen the force of the blood on the head while the muscles were relaxed. Despite these limitations, we can consider Rush an important transitional figure between the old era and the new. During the early part of this period of humanitarian reform, the use of   moral management —a wide-ranging method of treatment that focused on a patient’s social, individual, and occupational needs—became relatively widespread. This approach, which stemmed largely from the work of Pinel and Tuke, began in Europe during the late eighteenth century and in America during the early nineteenth century. Moral management in asylums emphasized the patients’ moral and spiritual development and the rehabilitation of their “character” rather than their physical or mental disorders, in part because very little effective treatment was available for these con- ditions at the time. The treatment or rehabilitation of the physi- cal or mental disorders was usually through manual labor and spiritual discussion, along with humane treatment. Moral management achieved a high degree of effectiveness— which is all the more amazing because it was done without the benefit of the antipsychotic drugs used today and because many of the patients were probably suffering from syphilis, a then- incurable disease of the central nervous system. In the 20-year period between 1833 and 1853, Worcester State Hospital’s discharge rate for patients who had been ill less than a year before admission was 71 percent. Even for patients with a longer preadmission disorder, the discharge rate was 59 percent (Bock- hoven, 1972). In London, Walford (1878) reported that during a 100-year period ending in 1876, the “cure” rate was 45.7 percent for the famed Bedlam Hospital. Despite its reported effectiveness in many cases, moral management was nearly abandoned by the latter part of the nineteenth century. The reasons were many and varied. Among the more obvious ones were ethnic prejudice against the rising immigrant population in hospitals, leading to tension between staff and patients; the failure of the movement’s leaders to train their own replacements; and the overextension of hospital facili- ties, which reflected the misguided belief that bigger hospitals would differ from smaller ones only in size. Two other reasons for the demise of moral management are, in retrospect, truly ironic. One was the rise of the   mental hygiene movement , which advocated a method of treatment that focused almost exclusively on the physical well-being of hos- pitalized mental patients. Although the patients’ comfort levels improved under the mental hygienists, the patients received no help for their mental problems and thus were subtly condemned to helplessness and dependency. Advances in biomedical science also contributed to the demise of moral management and the rise of the mental hygiene movement. These advances fostered the notion that all mental disorders would eventually yield to biological explanations and biologically based treatments (Luchins, 1989). Thus the psy- chological and social environment of a patient was considered largely irrelevant; the best one could do was keep the patient comfortable until a biological cure was discovered. Needless to say, the anticipated biological cure-all did not arrive, and by the late 1940s and early 1950s, discharge rates were down to about 30 percent. Its negative effects on the use of moral management notwithstanding, the mental hygiene movement has accounted for many humanitarian accomplishments.  BEnjAMin fRAnkLin’s EARLy DisCoVERy of THE PoTEnTiAL CuRATiVE EffECTs of ELECTRiC sHoCk   In school, most people learn about Benjamin Franklin’s early ex- perimentation with electricity in the early eighteenth century. His kite-flying during electric storms and its influence on the physical sciences is common knowledge. However, most people (even mental health professionals) are not aware that his work with electricity was among the earliest efforts to explore electric shock to treat mental illness, an insight he gained accidentally. His proposals for using electricity to treat melancholia (depres- sion) grew out of his observations that a severe shock he had experienced altered his memories (see the informative discus- sion by Finger & Zaromb, 2006). Franklin published articles describing his experience and suggested that physicians further study this method for treating melancholia. Shortly afterward, one of his friends, a physician named Ingenhousz, reported a similar incident in which he observed alterations in his
thinking following a shock he had received. He too called for clinical trials to study this phenomenon as a possible treatment for psychiatric patients. Although these early efforts pointed attention to a poten- tially valuable treatment approach, medical research on the procedure was slow to develop. Finger and Zaromb (2006) point out that it was not until the middle of the eighteenth century that electric shock was associated with amnesia. Moreover, it was not until the twentieth century that Cerletti and Bini (1938), at the University of Rome, initiated electric shock as a treatment for depression.  Dix AnD THE MEnTAL HyGiEnE MoVEMEnT   Dorothea Dix (1802–1887) was an energetic New Englander who be- came a champion of poor and “forgotten” people in prisons and mental institutions for decades during the nineteenth century. Dix, herself a child of very difficult and impover- ished circumstances (Viney, 1996), later became an important driving force in humane treatment for psychiatric patients. She worked as a schoolteacher as a young adult but was later forced into early retirement because of recurring attacks of tuberculosis. In 1841, she began to teach in a women’s prison. Through this contact she became acquainted with the deplorable conditions in jails, almshouses, and asylums. In a “Memorial” submitted to the U.S. Congress in 1848, she stated that she had seen  more than 9000 idiots, epileptics and insane in the United States, destitute of appropriate care and protection . . . bound with galling chains, bowed beneath fetters and heavy iron bails attached to drag-chains, lacerated with ropes, scourged with rods and terrified beneath storms of execration and cruel blows; now subject to jibes and scorn and torturing tricks; now abandoned to the most outrageous violations. (Zilboorg & Henry, 1941, pp. 583–584)  As a result of what she had seen, Dix carried on a zealous campaign between 1841 and 1881 that aroused people and legis- latures to do something about the inhuman treatment accorded the mentally ill. Through her efforts, the mental hygiene movement grew in America: Millions of dollars were raised to build suitable hospitals, and 20 states responded directly to her appeals. Not only was she instrumental in improving conditions in American hospitals but she also directed the opening of two large institutions in Canada and completely reformed the asylum system in Scotland and several other countries. She is credited with establishing 32 mental hospitals, an astonishing record given the ignorance and superstition that still prevailed in the field of mental health. Dix rounded out her career by organizing the nursing forces of the Northern armies during the Civil War. A resolution presented by the U.S. Congress in 1901 character- ized her as “among the noblest examples of humanity in all his- tory” (Karnesh, with Zucker, 1945, p. 18). Later critics have claimed that establishing hospitals for the mentally ill and increasing the number of people in them spawned overcrowded facilities and custodial care (Bockhoven, 1972; Dain, 1964). These critics have further claimed that housing patients in institutions away from society interfered with the treatment of the day (moral therapy) and deferred the search for more appropriate and effective treatments for mental disorders (Bockhoven, 1972). These criticisms, however, do not consider the context in which Dix’s contributions were made (see the Unresolved Issues at the end of this chapter). Her advo- cacy of the humane treatment of the mentally ill stood in stark contrast to the cruel treatment common at the time (Viney & Bartsch, 1984).  THE MiLiTARy AnD THE MEnTALLy iLL   Mental health treatment was also advanced by military medicine. The first mental health facility for treating mentally disordered war ca- sualties was opened by the Confederate Army in the American Civil War (Deutsch, 1944; Gabriel, 1987). An even more ex- tensive and influential program of military psychiatry evolved in Germany during the late 1800s. Lengweiler (2003) reviews the evolution of military psychiatry in Germany between the Franco-Prussian War in 1870 and World War I in 1914. During this period, psychiatrists, a number of whom made great contributions to the field of abnormal psychology (e.g., Emil Kraepelin and Richard von Krafft-Ebbing), worked with the military administration, conducting research and training  Dorothea Dix (1802–1887) was a tireless reformer who made great strides in changing public attitudes toward the mentally ill.
doctors to detect mental health problems that could inter- fere with performance of duty. One early research program illustrates the interplay between medicine and military ad- ministration. Kraepelin, who viewed alcohol as a key cause of psychological problems among soldiers, conducted a research project evaluating the extent to which alcohol consumption adversely affected the soldiers’ ability to fire their rifles effectively.  nineteenth-Century Views of the Causes and Treatment of Mental Disorders  In the early part of the nineteenth century, mental hospitals were controlled essentially by laypersons because of the prominence of moral management in the treatment of “lunatics.” Medical professionals—or “alienists,” as psychiatrists were called at this time in reference to their treating the “alienated,” or insane—had a relatively inconsequential role in the care of the insane and the management of the asylums of the day. Moreover, effective treat- ments for mental disorders were unavailable, the only measures being such procedures as drugging, bleeding, and purging, which produced few objective results. However, during the latter part of the century, alienists gained control of the insane asylums and incorporated the traditional moral management therapy into their other rudimentary physical medical procedures. Over time, the alienists acquired more status and influ- ence in society and became influential as purveyors of morality, touting the benefits of Victorian morality as important to good mental health. Mental disorders were only vaguely understood, and conditions such as melancholia (depression) were considered to be the result of nervous exhaustion. That is, psychiatrists of the time thought that emotional problems were caused by the expenditure of energy or by the depletion of bodily energies as a result of excesses in living. The mental deterioration or “shattered nerves” that supposedly resulted from a person’s using up pre- cious nerve force came to be referred to as “neurasthenia,” a condition that involved pervasive feelings of low mood, lack of energy, and physical symptoms that were thought to be related to “lifestyle” problems brought on by the demands of civilization. These vague symptoms, viewed by the alienists/psychiatrists as a definable medical condition, were then considered treatable by medical men of the times.  Changing Attitudes Toward Mental Health in the Early Twentieth Century  It is difficult to partition modern views of abnormal behav- ior into discrete, uniform attitudes or to trace their historical precedents without appearing arbitrary and overly simplistic. However, a brief, selective overview here will bring us into the contemporary era and set the scene for our discussion of the major viewpoints and causal considerations discussed in Chapter 3. By the end of the nineteenth century, the mental hospital or asylum—“the big house on the hill”—with its fortress-like appearance, had become a familiar landmark in America (see Payne & Sacks, 2009). In it, mental patients lived under relatively harsh conditions despite the inroads made by moral management. To the general public, however, the asylum was an eerie place and its occupants a strange and frightening lot. Little was done by the resident psychiatrists to educate the public or reduce the general fear and horror of insanity. A prin- cipal reason for this silence, of course, was that early psychia- trists had little actual information to impart and in some cases employed procedures that were damaging to patients. Gradually, however, important strides were made toward changing the general public’s attitude toward mental patients. In America, the pioneering work of Dix was fol- lowed by that of Clifford Beers (1876–1943), whose book   A Mind That Found Itself   was first published in 1908. Beers, a Yale graduate, described his own mental collapse and told of the bad treatment he received in three typical institutions of the day. Although chains and other torture devices had long since been given up, the straitjacket was still widely used as a means of “quieting” excited patients. Beers expe- rienced this treatment and supplied a vivid description of what such painful immobilization of the arms means to an overwrought mental patient in a widely read description of his experiences. After Beers recovered in the home of a kind attendant, he launched a campaign to make people realize that such treat- ment was no way to handle the sick. He soon won the interest and support of many public-spirited individuals, including the eminent psychologist William James and the “dean of American psychiatry,” Adolf Meyer.  In the first half of the twentieth century, hospital care for the mentally ill afforded very little in the way of effective treatment. In many cases, the care was considered to be harsh, punitive, and inhumane.
the World around us  Chaining Mental Health Patients  B ecause of limited mental health treatment resources in some countries, it is not uncommon for mentally ill people to be chained. Westermeyer and Kroll (1978) conducted an epidemiologic study on the use of restraints for mentally ill people in 27 villages in Laos. They reported that mentally ill people who were aggressive toward others or who were consid- ered to be a danger to themselves were sometimes restrained by being chained to posts. The woman from Laos in the photograph shown here suffered from a psychotic disorder and reportedly felt compelled to sweep her platform for 6 or 7 hours a day. She was restrained at a Buddhist temple in order to keep her from wandering into the jungle (Westermeyer, 2001).  Chained patient from Laos Treatment of patients at the Mohammad Ali Shah Shrine in eastern Afghanistan involves being fed only a small piece of bread, a raw chili, and water each day for 21 days. Their family is charged 20 pounds a month. Many patients are chained as a means of controlling their behavior. Many temples in some countries provide homes for psychologically disturbed individuals, although the care is typically inadequate. For example, Erwady, India, near Ma- dras, has 15 privately run homes, many of which are without electricity, tap water, toilet facilities, and beds. In 2000, six people died from waterborne disease at one of the Erwady asylums, prompting the government to direct an inquiry into the conditions of the mental health asylums. Later, fire swept through a palm-thatched shed that housed mentally ill people at one Erwady asylum, killing 25 patients and injur- ing 5 others, many of whom were chained to heavy stones or pillars (Associated Press, 2001). At the time of the fire, the asylum housed 46 residents; only 16 of the patients escaped uninjured.  Mental Hospital Care in the Twentieth Century  The twentieth century began with a continued period of growth in asylums for the mentally ill; however, the fate of mental patients during that century was neither uniform nor entirely positive (see The World Around Us box). At the beginning of the twentieth century, with the influence of enlightened people such as Clifford Beers, mental hospitals grew substantially in number—predominantly to house persons with severe mental disorders such as schizophrenia, depression, organic mental dis- orders, tertiary syphilis and paresis (syphilis of the brain), and severe alcoholism. By 1940 the public mental hospitals housed over 400,000 patients, roughly 90 percent of whom resided in large state-funded hospitals; the remainder resided in private hospitals (Grob, 1994). During this period, hospital stays were typically quite lengthy, and many mentally ill individuals were destined to be hospitalized for many years. For the first half of the twentieth century, hospital care was accompanied by little in the way of effective treatment, and the care was often harsh, punitive, and inhumane. The year 1946, however, marked the beginning of an important period of change. In that year, Mary Jane Ward published a very influential book,   The Snake Pit , which was popularized in a movie of the same name. This work called attention to the plight of mental patients and helped to create concern over the need to provide more humane mental health care in the community in place of the overcrowded men- tal hospitals. Also in 1946, the National Institutes of Mental Health was organized and provided active support for research and training through psychiatric residencies and (later) clinical psychology training programs. Moreover, the Hill-Burton Act, a program that funded community mental health hospitals, was passed during this period. This legislation, along with the Community Health Services Act of 1963, helped to create a far-reaching set of programs to develop outpatient psychiatric clinics, inpatient facilities in general hospitals, and community consultation and rehabilitation programs.
The need for reform in psychiatric hospitals was a promi- nent concern of many professionals and laypersons alike during the 1950s and 1960s. A great deal of professional attention was given to the need to improve conditions in mental hospitals following the publication of another influential book,   Asylums , by the sociologist Erving Goffman (1961). This book further exposed the inhumane treatment of mental patients and pro- vided a detailed account of neglect and maltreatment in mental hospitals. The movement to change the mental hospital environ- ment was also enhanced significantly by scientific advances in the last half of the twentieth century, particularly the develop- ment of effective medications for many disorders—for example, the use of lithium in the treatment of manic depressive disorders (Cade, 1949) and the introduction of phenothiazines for the treatment of schizophrenia. (See Developments in Research on p. 45 and  7 for further discussion.) During the latter decades of the twentieth century, our soci- ety had seemingly reversed its position with respect to the means of providing humane care for the mentally ill in the hospital environment. Vigorous efforts were made to close down men- tal hospitals and return psychiatrically disturbed people to the community, ostensibly as a means of providing more integrated and humane treatment than was available in the “isolated” envi- ronment of the psychiatric hospital and because of the success of medications (chlorpromazines) that emerged in the 1950s to alleviate psychotic symptoms (Alanen et al., 2009). Large numbers of psychiatric hospitals were closed, and there was a significant reduction in state and county mental hospital popula- tions, from over half a million in 1950 (Lerman, 1981) to about 100,000 by the early 1990s (Narrow et al., 1993). These reduc- tions are all the more impressive given that the U.S. population increased substantially over those years. This movement, referred to as   deinstitutionalization , although motivated by benevolent goals, has also created great difficulties for many psychologically disturbed persons and for many communities as well. As a phenomenon, deinstitutionalization is an international movement. For example, there has been a shift in the locus of care of patients with chronic psychiatric illnesses from psychi- atric hospitals to community-based residential services in Hong Kong (Chan, 2001), in the Netherlands (Pijl et al., 2001), and in Finland (Korkeila et al., 1998). Some countries have expe- rienced extensive deinstitutionalization over the past 20 years. For example, in England and Wales during the last decades of the twentieth century, only 14 of 130 psychiatric institutions remained open; and Australia showed a 90 percent reduction in hospital beds over the same period (Goldney, 2003). In a follow- up study of patients from 22 hospitals in Italy, D’Avanzo and colleagues (2003) report that all were closed and 39 percent of the patients in these hospitals had been discharged to nursing homes, 29 percent to residential facilities, and 29 percent to other psychi- atric hospitals; only 2 percent were returned to their families. The original impetus behind the deinstitutionalization pol- icy was that it was considered more humane (and cost effective) to treat disturbed people outside of large mental hospitals because doing so would prevent people from acquiring negative adaptations to hospital confinement. Many professionals were concerned that the mental hospitals were becoming permanent refuges for disturbed people who were “escaping” from the demands of everyday living and were settling into a chronic sick role with a permanent excuse for letting other people take care of them. There was great hope that new medications would pro- mote a healthy readjustment and enable former patients to live more productive lives outside the hospital. Many former patients have not fared well in community living, however, and authori- ties now frequently speak of the “abandonment” of chronic patients to a cruel and harsh existence. Evidence of this failure to treat psychiatric patients successfully in the community can be readily seen in our cities: Many of the people living on the streets in large cities today are homeless and mentally ill. The problems caused by deinstitutionalization appear to be due, in no small part, to the failure of society to develop ways to fill the gaps in mental health services in the community (Grob, 1994). The mental institution, once thought to be the most humane way to manage the problems of the severely mentally ill, came to be seen as obsolete or as an evil alternative, more of a problem than a solution to mental health problems. By the end of the twentieth century, inpatient mental hospitals had been substantially replaced by community-based care, day treatment hospitals, and outreach. The twentieth century closed on a note of uncertainty with respect to the best ways to manage the needs of severely dis- turbed psychiatric patients. It is clear that closing mental hospi- tals and providing treatment for severely disturbed people in the community has not proved to be the panacea it was touted to be only a few years ago (Whitaker, 2009). As we will discuss fur- ther in  7, deinstitutionalization has created problems for both patients and society as a whole. The role of the psychi- atric hospital in helping those with severe psychiatric problems  Freed from the confines of institutionalized care, or abandoned by soci- ety? Many homeless people suffer from one or more mental disorders. Deinstitutionalization, though motivated by benevolent goals, has cre- ated great difficulties for many psychologically disturbed individuals who have been released to a cruel and harsh existence.
is likely to undergo further evolution as society again finds itself unable to deal effectively with the problems that severe mental illness can create if ignored or left unattended (see Grob, 1994).  in review  •   Describe the changing views toward mental illness that evolved as scientific thinking came to have greater influence in Europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.  •   Discuss the development of the psychiatric hospital.  •   Describe the historical development of humanitarian reform, and give some of the reasons why it occurred.  •   Describe the changes in social attitudes that brought about major changes in the way persons with mental disorders have been treated.  The Emergence of Contemporary Views of Abnormal Behavior  While the mental hygiene movement was gaining ground in the United States during the latter years of the nineteenth cen- tury, great technological discoveries occurred both at home and abroad. These advances helped usher in what we know today as the scientific, or experimentally oriented, view of abnormal behavior and the application of scientific knowledge to the treatment of disturbed individuals. We will describe four major themes in abnormal psychology that spanned the nineteenth and twentieth centuries and generated powerful influences on our contemporary perspectives in abnormal behavior: (1) biological discoveries, (2) the development of a classification system for mental disorders, (3) the emergence of psychological causation views, and (4) experimental psychological research developments.  Biological Discoveries: Establishing the Link Between the Brain and Mental Disorder  Advances in the study of biological and anatomical factors as underlying both physical and mental disorders developed in this period. A major biomedical breakthrough, for example, came with the discovery of the organic factors underlying general paresis—syphilis of the brain. One of the most serious mental ill- nesses of the day, general paresis produced paralysis and insanity and typically caused death within 2 to 5 years as a result of brain deterioration. This scientific discovery, however, did not occur overnight; it required the combined efforts of many scientists and researchers for nearly a century.  GEnERAL PAREsis AnD syPHiLis   The discovery of a cure for general paresis began in 1825, when the French physician A. L. J. Bayle differentiated general paresis as a specific type of mental disorder. Bayle gave a complete and accurate description of the symptom pattern of paresis and convincingly presented his reasons for believing paresis to be a distinct disorder. Many years later, in 1897, the Viennese psychiatrist Richard von Krafft-Ebbing conducted experiments involving the inoculation of paretic patients with matter from syphilitic sores. None of the patients developed secondary symptoms of syphilis, which led to the conclusion that they must previously have been infected. This crucial experiment established the relationship between general paresis and syphilis. It was almost a decade later, in 1906, when August von Wassermann devised a blood test for syphilis. This development made it possible to check for the presence of the deadly bacteria in the bloodstream of an individual before the more serious consequences of infection appeared. Finally, in 1917, Julius von Wagner-Jauregg, chief of the psychiatric clinic of the University of Vienna, introduced the malarial fever treatment of syphilis and paresis because he knew that the high fever associated with malaria killed off the bacteria. He infected nine paretic patients with the blood of a malaria-infected soldier and found marked improvement in paretic symptoms in three patients and apparent recovery in three others. By 1925 several hospitals in the United States were incorporating the new malarial treatment for paresis into their hospital treatments. One of the earliest controlled stud- ies of malarial treatment for paresis was conducted by Bahr and Brutsch in Indiana in 1928. They found that out of the 100 patients studied, 37 percent of paresis patients showed significant recovery, 25 percent had been discharged, and 21 percent of those had returned to their previous or similar occu- pations. Today, of course, we have penicillin as an effective, simpler treatment of syphilis, but the early malarial treatment represented the first clear-cut conquest of a mental disorder by medical science. The field of abnormal psychology had come a long way—from superstitious beliefs to scientific proof of how brain pathology can cause a specific disorder. This breakthrough raised great hopes in the medical community that organic bases would be found for many other mental disorders—perhaps for all of them.  BRAin PATHoLoGy As A CAusAL fACToR   With the emergence of modern experimental science in the early part of the eighteenth century, knowledge of anatomy, physiology, neurology, chemistry, and general medicine increased rapidly. Scientists began to focus on diseased body organs as the cause of physical ailments. It was the next logical step for these re- searchers to assume that mental disorder was an illness based on the pathology of an organ—in this case, the brain. In 1757 Albrecht von Haller (1708–1777), in his   Elementa physiologae corporis humani , emphasized the importance of the brain in psy- chic functions and advocated postmortem dissection to study the brains of the insane. The first systematic presentation of this viewpoint, however, was made by the German psychiatrist Wilhelm Griesinger (1817–1868). In his textbook   The Pathology and Therapy of Psychic Disorders , published in 1845, Griesinger insisted that all mental disorders could be explained in terms of brain pathology. Following the discovery that brain deteriora- tion resulted in general paresis, other successes followed. Alois Alzheimer and other investigators established the brain
pathology in cerebral arteriosclerosis and in the senile mental disorders. Eventually, in the twentieth century, the organic pa- thologies underlying the toxic mental disorders (disorders caused by toxic substances such as lead), certain types of mental retarda- tion, and other mental illnesses were discovered. Along with the advancements in mental health treatment in the twentieth century came some unfortunate missteps. Dur- ing the early years of the twentieth century, Henry Cotton, a psychiatrist at a New Jersey hospital, developed a theory that mental health problems such as schizophrenia could be cured by removing the infections that he believed caused the condi- tion. He used surgical procedures to remove all of a person’s teeth or body parts such as tonsils, parts of the colon, testicles, or ovaries in order to reduce the infection (Scull, 2005). In the 1920s through the 1940s, an American psychiatrist, Walter Freeman, followed the strategies developed by Italian psychia- trist Egas Moniz to treat severe mental disorders using surgical procedures called   lobotomies . Freeman modified the surgery used by Moniz, using an ice pick to sever the neural con- nections in the brain after entering through the patient’s eye sockets (see discussion on lobotomy by El-Hai, 2005). These surgical efforts to treat mental disorder were considered to be ineffective and inappropriate by many in the profession at the time and were eventually discredited, although lobotomy is still used in some rare cases. It is important to note here that although the discovery of the organic bases of mental disorders addressed the “how” behind causation, it did not, in most cases, address the “why.” This is sometimes true even today. For example, although we know what causes certain “presenile” mental disorders—brain pathology— we do not yet know why some individuals are afflicted and others are not. Nonetheless, we can predict quite accurately the courses of these disorders. This ability is due not only to a greater under- standing of the organic factors involved but also, in large part, to the work of a follower of Griesinger, Emil Kraepelin.  The Development of a Classification system  Emil Kraepelin (1856–1926), another German psychiatrist, played a dominant role in the early development of the biologi- cal viewpoint. His textbook   Compendium der Psychiatrie , pub- lished in 1883, not only emphasized the importance of brain pathology in mental disorders but also made several related con- tributions that helped establish this viewpoint. The most impor- tant of these contributions was his system of classification of mental disorders, which became the forerunner of today’s   DSM  classification (see  ). Kraepelin noted that certain symp- tom patterns occurred together regularly enough to be regarded as specific types of mental disease. He then proceeded to describe and clarify these types of mental disorders, working out a scheme of classification that is the basis of our present system. Integrat- ing all of the clinical material underlying this classification was a Herculean task and represented a major contribution to the field of psychopathology. Kraepelin saw each type of mental disorder as distinct from the others and thought that the course of each was as predeter- mined and predictable as the course of measles. Thus the outcome of a given type of disorder could presumably be predicted even if it could not yet be controlled. Such claims led to widespread interest in the accurate description and classification of mental disorders.  Development of the Psychological Basis of Mental Disorder  Despite the emphasis on biological research, understanding of the psychological factors in mental disorders was progressing as well. The first major steps were taken by Sigmund Freud (1856–1939), the most frequently cited psychological theorist of the twentieth century (Street, 1994). During five decades of observation, treatment, and writing, Freud developed a compre- hensive theory of psychopathology that emphasized the inner dynamics of unconscious motives (often referred to as   psycho- dynamics ) that are at the heart of the   psychoanalytic perspec- tive . The methods he used to study and treat patients came to be called   psychoanalysis . We can trace the ancestral roots of psychoanalysis to a somewhat unexpected place—the study of hypnosis, especially in its relation to hysteria (for a contemporary discussion of hysteria see Brown, 2006). Hypnosis, an induced state of relaxation in which a person is highly open to suggestion, first came into widespread use in late-eighteenth- and early- nineteenth-century France.  Emil Kraepelin (1856–1926) was a German psychiatrist who developed an early synthesis and classification system of the hundreds of mental disor- ders by grouping diseases together based on common patterns of symp- toms. Kraepelin also demonstrated that mental disorders showed specific patterns in the genetics, course, and outcome of disorders.
MEsMERisM   Our efforts to understand psychological causation of mental disorder start with Franz Anton Mesmer (1734–1815), an Austrian physician who further developed the ideas of Para- celsus (the influential sixteenth-century physician and scholar; see Developments in Research above) about the influence of the planets on the human body. Mesmer believed that the planets af- fected a universal magnetic fluid in the body, the distribution of which determined health or disease. In attempting to find cures for mental disorders, Mesmer concluded that all people possessed magnetic forces that could be used to influence the distribution of the magnetic fluid in other people, thus effecting cures. Mesmer attempted to put his views into practice in Vienna and various other cities, but it was in Paris in 1778 that he gained a broad following. There, he opened a clinic in which he treated all kinds of diseases by using “animal magnetism.” In a dark room, patients were seated around a tub containing various  developments in researcH  The Search for Medications to Cure Mental Disorders  F or centuries physicians have sought a medicinal cure for mental disorder. One of the earliest known treatises on the use of drugs to treat mental disorders is the work of the Roman physician Galen ( a.d . 130–200). His writing details both the concoction of various medications and the clinical use of drug therapy with patients experiencing mental disorders. Most of his medications were laxatives and emetics (purga- tives) that were used to cleanse the body of nonhuman materi- als believed to be causing the person’s ills. During the Middle Ages, another notable but highly controversial physician-chemist named Paracelsus (1490–1541) experimented with various chemicals as medications to treat human disorders. He even used a substance referred to as “mummy powder” (ground up particles of mummies) and various other, seemingly more potent substances such as mercury. A more recent phase in the development of psychotropic medicine began in the 1950s. The root   Rauwolfia serpentina  had been used for centuries as an herbal folk medicine in India, where it had been prescribed for a wide array of afflictions, including insanity. In the early 1950s the active ingredient in  Rauwolfia , reserpine, was isolated by a Swiss drug company, and in 1953 psychiatrist R. A. Hakim wrote a prize-winning paper on using   Rauwolfia   to treat psychosis (as cited in Gupta et al., 1943). Today reserpine has been surpassed as a treatment for psychoses because of the development of other drugs and be- cause of its side effects, and it is mostly used in the treatment of hypertension. The second psychoactive drug to emerge in the 1950s as a treatment for severe mental disorder was chlorpromazine. A German chemist named Bernthesen, searching for compounds that would operate as dyes, first developed the drug in the lat- ter part of the nineteenth century. He synthesized a compound that is referred to as phenothiazine. Paul Erlich, a medical re- searcher and father of the field of chemotherapy, thought that this compound might be effective in treating human diseases by killing nonhuman cells while preserving human tissue. The drug was first tried as a means of treating malaria, and by the 1930s it was being employed as an anesthetic. In 1951, the French surgeon Henri Labroit employed the drug as an “artificial hibernator” to prevent shock among surgical patients. It was not until 1952 that two French psychiatrists, Jean Delay and Pierre Deniker, finding that the drug reduced psychotic symptoms, began to use chlorpromazine to treat psychiatric patients. The almost magical impact of antipsychotic medication was immediately felt in the psychiatric community in the United States. By 1956, the first year of widespread use of reserpine and chlorpromazine, the impact on psychiatric hospitalization had begun to show a remarkable effect. The previously increas- ing admission rate to psychiatric hospitals leveled off at 560,000 psychiatric inpatients in the United States. This number dropped to 490,000 by 1964 and to 300,000 by 1971. Currier (2000) re- ported that the number of inpatient psychiatric beds decreased sharply over the past generation, both in absolute numbers and as a percentage of total hospital beds in seven countries including the United States. The drop in available hospital beds between and 1960 and 1994 was from 4 per thousand to less than 1.3 per thousand of the population. In the United States, the available bed reductions were fostered by the movement for deinstitutionalization and the development of managed care. In Europe and other regions, the number of beds decreased largely as a result of intense government pressure to curtail health care budgets. Interestingly, the need for psychiatric in- patient care has remained despite the closing of public mental health hospitals. Hutchins and colleagues (2011) point out that the number of private mental hospitals doubled between 1976 and 1992 and that two-thirds of all psychiatric hospitals and half of all inpatient beds were in private facilities. The effectiveness of drugs in reducing psychotic symptoms has also led researchers to develop more specific causal hypoth- eses for mental disorders such as schizophrenia. Researchers have noted that antipsychotic drugs such as the phenothiazines modify the levels of dopamine, a neurotransmitter associated with schizophrenia. These observations have led theoreticians to the “dopamine hypothesis”—that the metabolism of dopamine is associated with the cause of schizophrenia.  sources:   Frankenburg, 1994; Green, 1951; Moriarty et al., 1984; Pachter, 1951.
chemicals, and iron rods protruding from the tub were applied to the affected areas of the patients’ bodies. Accompanied by music, Mesmer appeared in a lilac robe, passing from one patient to another and touching each one with his hands or his wand. By this means, Mesmer was reportedly able to remove hysterical anesthesias and paralyses. He also demonstrated most of the phe- nomena later connected with the use of hypnosis. Mesmer was eventually branded a charlatan by his medi- cal colleagues and an appointed body of noted scholars that included the American scientist Benjamin Franklin (Van Doren, 1938). The committee conducted what have been referred to as the first psychological experiments (Dingfelder, 2010), or tests such as tricking a woman into believing that she had been influenced by magnetism. The committee concluded that the real source of Mesmer’s power was in the patients and not in “magnetism.” Mesmer was forced to leave Paris and quickly faded into obscurity. His methods and results, however, were at the center of scientific controversy for many years—in fact,  mesmerism , as his technique came to be known, was as much a source of heated discussion in the early nineteenth century as psychoanalysis became in the early twentieth century. This dis- cussion led to renewed interest in hypnosis itself as an explana- tion of the “cures” that took place. Even after mesmerism was discredited in France, this method of inducing trance and its perceived potential for treat- ing illness had a long life in the United States. The magical powers of mesmerism were introduced in 1836 and intrigued a number of Americans, ranging from the poet Emerson to the physician Benjamin Rush, with speculations about its higher mental powers and its potential application as an anesthetic for surgical procedures (Schmit, 2005). A number of lecturers trav- eled the United States illustrating its medical use and giving demonstrations, including to the U.S. Congress. The early mes- merists, though considered to be “quacks” by many physicians, had an influence on medical practice until the introduction of ether as a surgical anesthetic (Schmit, 2005). In spite of its limi- tations, mesmerism clearly had an influence on psychology and hypnosis for many years and came to be influential in spiritual movements such as Christian Science in the nineteenth century.  THE nAnCy sCHooL   Ambrose August Liébeault (1823–1904), a French physician who practiced in the town of Nancy, used hypnosis successfully in his practice. Also in Nancy at the time was a professor of medicine, Hippolyte Bernheim (1840–1919), who became interested in the relationship between hysteria and hypnosis. His interest was piqued by Liébeault’s success in using hypnosis to cure a patient whom Bernheim had been treating unsuccessfully by more conventional methods for 4 years (Selling, 1943). Bernheim and Liébeault worked to- gether to develop the hypothesis that hypnotism and hysteria were related and that both were due to suggestion (Brown & Menninger, 1940). Their hypothesis was based on two lines of evidence: (1) The phenomena observed in hysteria—such as pa- ralysis of an arm, inability to hear, and anesthetic areas in which an individual could be stuck with a pin without feeling pain (all of which occurred when there was apparently nothing organi- cally wrong)—could be produced in normal subjects by means of hypnosis. (2) The same symptoms also could be removed by means of hypnosis. Thus it seemed likely that hysteria was a sort of self-hypnosis. The physicians who accepted this view ulti- mately came to be known as the   Nancy School . Meanwhile, Jean Charcot (1825–1893), who was head of the Salpêtrière Hospital in Paris and the leading neurologist of his time, had been experimenting with some of the phenomena described by the mesmerists. As a result of his research, Charcot disagreed with the findings of the Nancy School and insisted that degenerative brain changes led to hysteria. In this, Charcot was eventually proved wrong, but work on the problem by so outstanding a scientist did a great deal to awaken medical and scientific interest in hysteria. The dispute between Charcot and the Nancy School was one of the major debates of medical history, and many harsh words were spoken on both sides. The adherents to the Nancy School finally triumphed. This first recognition of a psychologically caused mental disorder spurred more research on the behavior underlying hysteria and other disorders. Soon it was suggested that psychological factors were also involved in anxiety states, phobias, and other psychopathologies. Eventually, Charcot himself was won over to the new point of view and did much to promote the study of psychological factors in various mental disorders. The debate over whether mental disorders are caused by biological or psychological factors continues to this day. The Nancy School–Charcot debate represented a major step forward for psychology, however. Toward the end of the nineteenth century, it became clear that mental disorders could have psy- chological bases, biological bases, or both. But a major question remained to be answered: How do the psychologically based mental disorders actually develop?  Mesmer believed that the distribution of magnetic fluid in the body was responsible for determining health or disease. He further thought that all people possessed magnetic forces that could be used to influence the distribution of fluid in others, thus effecting cures. In this painting of his therapy, Mesmer stands on the far right, holding a wand. He was eventu- ally branded a fraud by his colleagues. His theories did, however, demon- strate most of the phenomena later connected with the use of hypnosis.
THE BEGinninGs of PsyCHoAnALysis   The first systematic attempt to answer this question was made by Sigmund Freud (1856–1939). Freud was a brilliant, young Viennese neurolo- gist who received an appointment as lecturer on nervous diseases at the University of Vienna. In 1885 he went to study under Charcot and later became acquainted with the work of Liébeault and Bernheim at Nancy. He was impressed by their use of hypno- sis with hysterical patients and came away convinced that power- ful mental processes could remain hidden from consciousness. On his return to Vienna, Freud worked in collaboration with another Viennese physician, Josef Breuer (1842–1925), who had incorporated an interesting innovation into the use of hypnosis with his patients. Unlike hypnotists before them, Freud and Breuer directed patients to talk freely about their problems while under hypnosis. The patients usually displayed consider- able emotion and, on awakening from their hypnotic states, felt a significant emotional release, which was called a   catharsis . This simple innovation in the use of hypnosis proved to be of great significance: It not only helped patients discharge their emotional tensions by discussing their problems but also revealed to the therapist the nature of the difficulties that had brought about cer- tain symptoms. The patients, on awakening, saw no relationship between their problems and their hysterical symptoms. It was this approach that thus led to the discovery of the  unconscious —the portion of the mind that contains experi- ences of which a person is unaware—and with it the belief that processes outside of a person’s awareness can play an important role in determining behavior. In 1893, Freud and Breuer pub- lished their joint paper   On the Psychical Mechanisms of Hysterical Phenomena , which was one of the great milestones in the study of the dynamics of the conscious and unconscious. Freud soon discovered, moreover, that he could dispense with hypnosis entirely. By encouraging patients to say whatever came into their minds without regard to logic or propriety, Freud found that patients would eventually overcome inner obstacles to remem- bering and would discuss their problems freely. Two related methods enabled him to understand patients’ conscious and unconscious thought processes. One method,  free association , involved having patients talk freely about themselves, thereby providing information about their feel- ings, motives, and so forth. A second method,   dream analysis , involved having patients record and describe their dreams. These techniques helped analysts and patients gain insights and achieve a better understanding of the patients’ emotional prob- lems. Freud devoted the rest of his long and energetic life to the development and elaboration of psychoanalytic principles. His views were formally introduced to American scientists in 1909, when he was invited to deliver a series of lectures at Clark University by the eminent psychologist G. Stanley Hall (1844–1924), who was then president of the university. These lectures created a great deal of controversy and helped popular- ize psychoanalytic concepts with scientists as well as with the general public. We will discuss the psychoanalytic viewpoint further in Chapter 3. Freud’s lively and seminal views attracted a sub- stantial following over his long career, and interest in his ideas persists today, more than 100 years after he began writing. Numerous other clinician-theorists—such as Carl Jung, Alfred Adler, and Harry Stack Sullivan—launched “spin-off” theories that have elaborated on the psychoanalytic viewpoint. More will also be said of these views in Chapter 3. Here we will examine the early development of psychological research and explore the evolution of the behavioral perspective on abnor- mal behavior.  The Evolution of the Psychological Research Tradition: Experimental Psychology  The origins of much of the scientific thinking in contempo- rary psychology lie in early rigorous efforts to study psycho- logical processes objectively, as demonstrated by Wilhelm Wundt (1832–1920) and William James (1842–1910). Although the early work of these experimental psychologists did not bear directly on clinical practice or on our under- standing of abnormal behavior, this tradition was clearly influential a few decades later in molding the thinking of the psychologists who brought these rigorous attitudes into the clinic. (For a discussion of the history of clinical psychology, see L. T. Benjamin, 2005.)  THE EARLy PsyCHoLoGy LABoRAToRiEs   In 1879 Wilhelm Wundt established the first experimental psychology laboratory at the University of Leipzig. While studying the psy- chological factors involved in memory and sensation, Wundt and his colleagues devised many basic experimental methods  Psychoanalysis was introduced to North America at a famous meeting at Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts, in 1909. Among those present were (back row) A. A. Brill, Ernest Jones, and Sandor Ferenczi; (front row) Sigmund Freud, G. Stanley Hall, and Carl Jung.
and strategies. Wundt directly influenced early contributors to the empirical study of abnormal behavior; they followed his ex- perimental methodology and also applied some of his research strategies to study clinical problems. For example, a student of Wundt’s, J. McKeen Cattell (1860–1944), brought Wundt’s ex- perimental methods to the United States and used them to assess individual differences in mental processing. He and other stu- dents of Wundt’s work established research laboratories through- out the United States. It was not until 1896, however, that another of Wundt’s students, Lightner Witmer (1867–1956), combined research with application and established the first American psychological clinic at the University of Pennsylvania. Witmer’s clinic focused on the problems of mentally deficient children in terms of both research and therapy. Witmer, considered to be the founder of clinical psychology (McReynolds, 1996, 1997), was influ- ential in encouraging others to become involved in this new profession. Other clinics were soon established. One clinic of great importance was the Chicago Juvenile Psychopathic Institute (later called the Institute of Juvenile Research), estab- lished in 1909 by William Healy (1869–1963). Healy was the first to view juvenile delinquency as a symptom of urbanization, not as a result of inner psychological problems. In so doing, he was among the first to recognize a new area of causation— environmental, or sociocultural, factors. By the first decade of the twentieth century, psychologi- cal laboratories and clinics were burgeoning, and a great deal of research was being generated (Goodwin, 2011). The rapid and objective communication of scientific findings was perhaps as important in the development of modern psychology as the collec- tion and interpretation of research findings. This period saw the origin of many scientific journals for the propagation of research and theoretical discoveries, and as the years have passed, the num- ber of journals has grown. The American Psychological Association now publishes 54 scientific journals, many of which focus on research into abnormal behavior and personality functioning.  THE BEHAVioRAL PERsPECTiVE   Although psychoanalysis dominated thought about abnormal behavior at the end of the nineteenth century and in the early twentieth century, another school—behaviorism—emerged out of experimental psychology to challenge its supremacy. Behavioral psychologists believed that the study of subjective experience—through the techniques of free association and dream analysis—did not provide accept- able scientific data because such observations were not open to verification by other investigators. In their view, only the study of directly observable behavior—and the stimuli and reinforcing conditions that “control” it—could serve as a basis for formulat- ing scientific principles of human behavior. The   behavioral perspective   is organized around a central theme: the role of learning in human behavior. Although this perspective was initially developed through research in the laboratory rather than through clinical practice with disturbed individuals, its implications for explaining and treating maladaptive behavior soon became evident.  Classical Conditioning   The origins of the behavioral view of abnormal behavior and its treatment are tied to experimental work on the type of learning known as   classical conditioning — a form of learning in which a neutral stimulus is paired repeat- edly with an unconditioned stimulus that naturally elicits an unconditioned behavior. After repeated pairings, the neutral stimulus becomes a conditioned stimulus that elicits a condi- tioned response. This work began with the discovery of the conditioned reflex by Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov (1849–1936). Around the turn of the twentieth century, Pavlov demonstrated that dogs would gradually begin to salivate in response to a nonfood stimulus such as a bell after the stimulus had been regularly accompanied by food. Pavlov’s discoveries in classical conditioning excited a young American psychologist, John B. Watson (1878–1958), who was searching for objective ways to study human behavior. Watson reasoned that if psychology was to become a true science, it would have to abandon the subjectivity of inner sensations and other “mental” events and limit itself to what could be objec- tively observed. What better way to do this than to observe sys- tematic changes in behavior brought about simply by rearranging stimulus conditions? Watson thus changed the focus of psychol- ogy to the study of overt behavior rather than the study of theo- retical mentalistic constructs, an approach he called   behaviorism . Watson, a man of impressive energy and demeanor, saw great possibilities in behaviorism, and he was quick to point them out to his fellow scientists and a curious public. He boasted that through conditioning he could train any healthy child to become whatever sort of adult one wished. He also challenged the psychoanalysts and the more biologically oriented psycholo- gists of his day by suggesting that abnormal behavior was the product of unfortunate, inadvertent earlier conditioning and could be modified through reconditioning.  Ivan Pavlov (1849–1936), a pioneer in demonstrating the part condition- ing plays in behavior, is shown here with the staff and some of the appa- ratus used to condition reflexes in dogs.
By the 1930s Watson had had an enormous impact on American psychology. Watson’s approach placed heavy emphasis on the role of the social environment in conditioning personality development and behavior, both normal and abnormal. Today’s behaviorally oriented psychologists still accept many of the basic tenets of Watson’s doctrine, although they are more cautious in their claims.  operant Conditioning   While Pavlov and Watson were studying stimulus–response conditioning, E. L. Thorndike (1874–1949) and subsequently B. F. Skinner (1904–1990) were exploring a different kind of conditioning, one in which the con- sequences of behavior influence behavior. Behavior that operates on the environment may be instrumental in producing certain outcomes, and those outcomes, in turn, determine the likeli- hood that the behavior will be repeated on similar occasions. For example, Thorndike studied how cats could learn a particular response, such as pulling a chain, if that response was followed by food reinforcement. This type of learning came to be called instrumental conditioning and was later renamed   operant conditioning   by Skinner. Both terms are still used today. In Skinner’s view, behavior is “shaped” when something reinforces a particular activity of an organism—which makes it possible “to shape an animal’s behavior almost as a sculptor shapes a lump of clay” (Skinner, 1951, pp. 26–27). In this chapter we have touched on several important trends in the evolution of the field of abnormal psychology and have recounted the contributions of numerous individuals from his- tory who have shaped our current views. The vast amount of information available can cause confusion and controversy when efforts are made to obtain an integrated view of behavior and causation. We may have left supernatural beliefs behind, but we have moved into something far more complex in trying to deter- mine the role of natural factors—be they biological, psychologi- cal, or sociocultural—in abnormal behavior. For a recap of some of the key contributors to the field of abnormal psychology, see Table 2.1.  in review  •   Compare the views of the Nancy School with those of Charcot. How did this debate influence modern psychology?  •   Evaluate the impact of the work of Freud and that of Watson on psychology today.  •   How did early experimental science help to establish brain pathology as a causal factor in mental disorders?  •   Describe the historical development of the behavioral view in psychology.  B. F. Skinner (1904–1990) formulated the concept of operant condition- ing, in which reinforcers can be used to make a response more or less probable and frequent.  table   2.1  Major figures in the Early History of Abnormal Psychology The Ancient World  Hippocrates (460–377   b   .c.)   A Greek physician who believed that mental disease was the result of natural causes and brain pathology rather than demonology.  Plato (429–347   b .c   .)   A Greek philosopher who believed that mental patients should be treated humanely and should not be held responsible for their actions.  Aristotle (384–322   b .c   .)   A Greek philosopher and a pupil of Plato who believed in the Hippocratic theory that various agents, or humors, within the body, when im- balanced, were responsible for mental disorders. Aristotle rejected the notion of psychological factors as causes of mental disorders.  Galen ( a.d .   130–200)   A Greek physician who contributed much to our understand- ing of the nervous system. Galen divided the causes of mental disorders into physical and mental categories.   Galen  Hippocrates
The Middle Ages  Avicenna (980–1037)   An ancient Persian physician who promoted principles of humane treatment for the mentally disturbed at a time when Western approaches to mental illness were inhumane.  Hildegard (1098–1179)   A remarkable woman, known as the “Sybil of the Rhine,” who used curative powers of natural objects for healing and wrote treatises about natural history and medicinal uses of plants.  The sixteenth Through the Eighteenth Centuries  Paracelsus (1490–1541)   A Swiss physician who rejected demonology as a cause of abnormal behavior. Paracelsus believed in psychic causes of mental illness.  Teresa of Avila (1515–1582)   A Spanish nun, since canonized, who argued that mental disorder was an illness of the mind.  Johann Weyer (1515–1588)   A German physician who argued against demonology and was ostracized by his peers and the Church for his progressive views.  Robert Burton (1576–1640)   An Oxford scholar who wrote a classic, influential treatise on depression,   The Anatomy of Melancholia , in 1621.  William Tuke (1732–1822)   An English Quaker who established the York Retreat, where mental patients lived in humane surroundings.  Philippe Pinel (1745–1826)   A French physician who pioneered the use of moral management in La Bicêtre and La Salpêtrière hospitals in France, where mental patients were treated in a humane way.  Benjamin Rush (1745–1813)   An American physician and the founder of American psychiatry, who used moral management, based on Pinel’s humanitarian methods, to treat the mentally disturbed.  The nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries  Dorothea Dix (1802–1887)   An American teacher who founded the mental hygiene movement in the United States, which focused on the physical well-being of mental patients in hospitals.  Clifford Beers (1876–1943)   An American who campaigned to change public attitudes toward mental patients after his own experiences in mental institutions.  Franz Anton Mesmer (1734–1815)   An Austrian physician who conducted early investigations into hypnosis as a medical treatment.  Emil Kraepelin (1856–1926)   A German psychiatrist who developed the first diagnostic system.  Sigmund Freud (1856–1939)   The founder of the school of psychological therapy known as psychoanalysis.  Wilhelm Wundt (1832–1920)   A German scientist who established the first experimental psychology laboratory in 1879 and subsequently influenced the empirical study of abnormal behavior.  J. McKeen Cattell (1860–1944)   An American psychologist who adopted Wundt’s methods and studied individual differences in mental processing.  Lightner Witmer (1867–1956)   An American psychologist who established the first psychological clinic in the United States, focusing on problems of mentally deficient children. He also founded the journal   The Psychological Clinic   in 1907.  William Healy (1869–1963)   An American psychologist who established the Chicago Juvenile Psychopathic Institute and advanced the idea that mental illness was due to environmental, or sociocultural, factors.  Ivan Pavlov (1849–1936)   A Russian physiologist who published classical studies in the psychology of learning.  John B. Watson (1878–1958)   An American psychologist who conducted early research into learning principles and came to be known as the father of behaviorism.  B. F. Skinner (1904–1990)   An American learning theorist who developed the school of learning known as operant conditioning and was influential in incorporating behav- ioral principles into inflencing behavioral change.  Avicenna  John B. Watson  Dorothea Dix  Benjamin Rush B. F. Skinner  Sigmund Freud
UNresolved issues  Interpreting Historical Events  U nderstanding current events and phenomena depends to a substantial degree on having an accurate understand- ing of the historical development of knowledge. Many psychologists hold the view that psychological theorizing can be advanced by greater use of historical data (McGuire, 1994). This chapter has attempted to provide a historical perspective on some of the concepts you will encounter in the chapters that follow. You might think that looking back in history to get a pic- ture of events that occurred long ago would not be a difficult task—that it would be a simple matter of reviewing some history books and some publications from the time in question. How- ever, different and conflicting views as to the importance and relevance of historical events in contemporary psychology have emerged. The traditional view maintains that historical events are stepping stones for understanding contemporary events, while a “New History” approach minimizes this cumulative and often celebratory approach and questions the cumulative knowl- edge aspect. Instead, this approach favors considering history as “national habits or characteristics of a culture that does not nec- essarily serve as cumulative force in the advancement of knowl- edge” (for an interesting discussion of historical approaches see Lovett, 2006). The distinction here is whether past developments in acquiring knowledge and understanding build on each other to create a more accurate picture or whether such develop- ments should be viewed independently in their own context. Regardless of one’s view of the historical approach, those who try to understand the historical context of particular phenomena or ideas are sometimes confronted with what Burton (2001) referred to as the tenacity of historical misinformation. He pointed out that there is one discouraging theme in the history of science—the widespread acceptance of false accounts. He noted that it is not uncommon for psychological findings and theories to be exaggerated or distorted and that the ex- aggerations frequently spread much further through public sources than do the authentic facts. For example, he noted the widespread acceptance, and inclusion in many textbooks, of in- accurate restatements of the widely cited study of Little Albert’s fear of furry objects:  L ittLe   A Lbert  Little Albert was the famous toddler who, originally unafraid of rats, exhibited such a fear when J. B. Watson and Rayner (1920) paired the presence of a rat with a loud noise. Harris (1979), Samelson (1980), and Gilovich (1991) are among the critics who have noted how frequently and consistently this case is misrepresented and exaggerated. J. B. Watson and Rayner described pairing the loud noise with the rat and later testing Albert’s reaction to a rat and a rabbit, as well as to blocks, a seal coat, cotton wool, the hair of Watson and some assistants, and a Santa Claus mask. Albert never reacted to the blocks or the assistants’ hair, always reacted to the rat, and reacted to the other objects with various degrees of agitation that were sometimes vividly described but sometimes merely (and vaguely) termed “negative reac- tion.” According to Harris (1979, p. 153), secondary sources have erroneously reported the testing of “a fur pelt, . . . a man’s beard, . . . a cat, a pup, a fur muff, . . . a white furry glove, . . . Albert’s aunt, who supposedly wore fur, . . . ei- ther the fur coat or the fur neckpiece of Albert’s mother, . . . and even a teddy bear.” (pp. 228–229)  Another factor that can affect the quality of historical in- formation is that our views of history and our understanding of events are sometimes open to reinterpretation. As Schudson (1995) points out, “Collective memory, more than individual memory, at least in liberal pluralistic societies, is provisional. It is always open to contestation” (p. 16). Any number of obstacles can stand in the way of our gaining an accurate picture of the attitudes and behaviors of people who lived hundreds of years ago. This has certainly been the case with our views of the Mid- dle Ages (Kroll & Bachrach, 1984). The foremost problem in retrospective psychological analysis is that we cannot rely on direct observation, a hallmark of psycho- logical research. Instead, we must turn to written documents or historical surveys of the times. Although these sources are often full of fascinating information, they may not reveal directly the information we seek; we must therefore extrapolate “facts” from the information we have, which is not always an easy task. We are restricted in our conclusions by the documents or sources available to us. Attempting to learn about people’s attitudes and subtle social perceptions hundreds of years ago by exam- ining surviving church documents or biographical accounts is less than ideal. First, we inevitably view these documents out of the context in which they were written. Second, we do not know whether the authors had ulterior motives or what the real purposes of the documents were. For example, some historians have concluded erroneously that people of the Middle Ages considered sin to be a major causal factor in mental illness. This misconception may have been due in part to zealous authors invoking “God’s punishment” against the victims of mental ill- nesses who happened to be their enemies. Apparently, if the victims happened to be friends, sin was typically not mentioned as a causal factor (Kroll & Bachrach, 1984). Such writings, of course, are biased, but we may have no way of knowing this. The fewer the sources surveyed, the more likely that any existing bias will go undetected. In other cases, concepts important to historical interpretation may have quite a different meaning to us today than they had in the past, or the meaning may simply be unclear. Kroll and Bachrach (1984) point out that the concept of “possession,” so critical to our views of the Middle Ages, is a very vague and complex concept for which we have no helpful natural models.
Our language fails us, except for colorful analogies and meta- phors. Just as the term   nervous breakdown   means different things to different people, so too   possession   means and meant many different things and undoubtedly had a different range of meanings to medieval persons from what it has to us. This kind of uncertainty can make definitive assessments of things that happened during the Middle Ages difficult, if not impossible (Phillips, 2002). Bias can come into play during interpretation also. Our interpre- tations of historical events or previously held beliefs can be col- ored by our own views of what is normal and what is abnormal. In fact, it is difficult to conduct a retrospective analysis without taking current perspectives and values as a starting point. For example, our modern beliefs about the Middle Ages have led, says Schoeneman (1984), to our contemporary misinterpretation that during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries the mentally ill were typically accused of being witches. For most of us, this mistaken interpretation makes sense simply because we do not understand the medieval perspective on witchcraft. Although reevaluations of the Middle Ages have discredited the view that demonology, sin, and witchcraft played key roles in the medieval understanding of mental illness, it is also clear that in some cases these concepts were associated with mental ill- ness. Where does the truth lie? It appears that the last word has not been written on the Middle Ages, nor on any period of our history for that matter. At best, historical views—and, therefore, retrospective psychological studies—must be regarded as work- ing hypotheses that are open to change as new perspectives are applied to history and as “new” historical documents are discovered.  2.1   How has abnormal behavior been viewed throughout history?  •   Understanding of abnormal behavior has not evolved smoothly or uniformly over the centuries; the steps have been uneven, with great gaps in between, and unusual—even bizarre—views or beliefs have often sidetracked researchers and theorists.  •   The dominant social, economic, and religious views of the times have had a profound influence over how people have viewed abnormal behavior.  •   In the ancient world, superstitious explanations for mental dis- orders were followed by the emergence of medical concepts in many places such as Egypt and Greece; many of these concepts were developed and refined by Roman physicians.  •   After the fall of Rome near the end of the fifth century a.d., superstitious views dominated popular thinking about mental disorders for over 1,000 years. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, it was still widely believed, even by scholars, that some mentally disturbed people were possessed by a devil.  2.2   What effect did the emergence of humanism have on abnormal psychology?  •   Great strides have been made in our understanding of abnormal behavior. For example, during the latter part of the Middle Ages and the early Renaissance, a spirit of scientific questioning reap- peared in Europe, and several noted physicians spoke out against inhumane treatments. There was a general movement away from superstitions and “magic” toward reasoned, scientific studies.  •   With recognition of a need for the special treatment of disturbed people came the founding of various “asylums” toward the end of the sixteenth century. However, institutionalization brought the isolation and maltreatment of mental patients. Slowly this situa- tion was recognized, and in the eighteenth century further efforts were made to help afflicted individuals by providing them with better living conditions and humane treatment, although these improvements were the exception rather than the rule.  •   The nineteenth and early twentieth centuries witnessed a number of scientific and humanitarian advances. The work of Philippe Pinel in France, of William Tuke in England, and of Benjamin Rush and Dorothea Dix in the United States prepared the way for several important developments in contemporary abnormal psychology, such as moral management. Among these were the gradual acceptance of mental patients as afflicted individu- als who need and deserve professional attention; the successful application of biomedical methods to disorders; and the growth of scientific research into the biological, psychological, and socio- cultural roots of abnormal behavior.  •   The reform of mental hospitals continued into the twentieth cen- tury, but over the last four decades of the century there has been a strong movement to close mental hospitals and release people into the community. This movement remains controversial in the early part of the twenty-first century.  2.3   What developments led to the contemporary view of abnormal psychology?  •   In the nineteenth century, great technological discoveries and scientific advancements that were made in the biological sciences enhanced the understanding and treatment of disturbed indi- viduals. One major biomedical breakthrough came with the dis- covery of the organic factors underlying general paresis—syphilis of the brain—one of the most serious mental illnesses of the day.  2   summary
•   Beginning in the early part of the eighteenth century, knowledge of anatomy, physiology, neurology, chemistry, and general medi- cine increased rapidly. These advances led to the identification of the biological, or organic, pathology underlying many physical ailments.  •   The development of a psychiatric classification system by Kraepelin played a dominant role in the early development of the biological viewpoint. Kraepelin’s work (a forerunner to the   DSM  system) helped to establish the importance of brain pathology in mental disorders and made several related contributions that helped establish this viewpoint.  •   The first major steps toward understanding psychological factors in mental disorders occurred with mesmerism and the Nancy School, followed by the work of Sigmund Freud. During five decades of observation, treatment, and writing, he developed a theory of psychopathology, known as “psychoanalysis,” that emphasized the inner dynamics of unconscious motives. Over the last half-century, other clinicians have modified and revised Freud’s theory, which has thus evolved into new psychodynamic perspectives.  •   Scientific investigation into psychological factors and human behavior began to make progress in the latter part of the nineteenth century. The end of the nineteenth century and the early twentieth century saw experimental psychology evolve into clinical psychology with the development of clinics to study, as well as intervene in, abnormal behavior.  •   Paralleling this development was the work of Pavlov in under- standing learning and conditioning. Behaviorism emerged as an explanatory model in abnormal psychology. The behavioral perspective is organized around a central theme—that learn- ing plays an important role in human behavior. Although this perspective was initially developed through research in the laboratory (unlike psychoanalysis, which emerged out of clinical practice with disturbed individuals), it has been shown to have important implications for explaining and treating maladaptive behavior.  •   Understanding the history of psychopathology—its forward steps and missteps alike—helps us understand the emergence of mod- ern concepts of abnormal behavior.  asylums   35  behavioral perspective   48  behaviorism   48  catharsis   47  classical conditioning   48  deinstitutionalization   42  dream analysis   47  exorcisms   34  free association   47  insanity   36  lycanthropy   34  mass madness   33  mental hygiene movement   38  mesmerism   46  moral management   38  nancy school   46  operant conditioning   49  psychoanalysis   44  psychoanalytic perspective   44  saint Vitus’s dance   34  tarantism   34  unconscious   47  key terms
learning objectives  3.1  What are the causes and risk factors for abnormal behavior?  3.2  What viewpoints can we take to help us understand the causes of abnormal behavior?  3.3  What does the biological viewpoint tell us about abnormal behavior and what are the biological causal factors of abnormal behavior?  3.4  What are the psychological viewpoints on abnormal psychology?  3.5  What are the psychological causal factors behind abnormal behavior?  3.6  How does the sociocultural viewpoint help us understand abnormal behavior?  3.7  What are the sociocultural causal factors of abnormal behavior?  We saw in the last chapter that speculation about the causes of abnormal behavior goes back very far in human history. From early times, those who observed disordered behavior grappled with the question of its cause. Hippocrates, for example, had a type of disease model and suggested that an imbalance in the four bodily humors produced abnormal behavior, with each humor connected with certain kinds of behavior. To other ob- servers, the cause was possession by demons or evil spirits. Later, bodily dysfunction was suggested as a cause. Each attempt at identifying a cause brought with it a theory, or model, of abnormal behavior. Today we are still puzzling over the causes of abnormal behavior, and speculation about causes continues to give rise to new models of abnormality. Since about 1900, several important schools of thought have developed elaborate models to explain the origins of abnormal behavior and to suggest how it might be treated. We will discuss the most influential of these theoretical perspectives in this chapter, paying special attention to the different types of causal factors that each perspective has identified. First, however, we need to address the very nature of the concept of causation as it is applied to abnor- mal behavior.  Causes and Risk Factors for Abnormal Behavior  Central to the field of abnormal psychology are questions about what causes people to experience mental distress and to behave maladaptively. If we knew the causes for given disorders, we might be able to prevent conditions that lead to them and per- haps reverse those that maintain them. We could also classify and diagnose disorders better if we clearly understood their causes rather than relying on clusters of symptoms, as we usually must do now. Although understanding the causes of abnormal behavior is clearly a desirable goal, it is enormously difficult to achieve because human behavior is so complex. Even the simplest human behavior, such as speaking or writing a single word, is the product of thousands of prior events—the connections among which are not always clear. Attempting to understand a person’s life in causal terms is a task of enormous magnitude, whether it be a fairly normal or adaptive life or a life characterized by severe mental disorders. As a result, many investigators now prefer to speak of   risk factors   (variables correlated with an abnormal out- come) rather than of causes (Rutter, 2006a). Although under- standing causes remains the ultimate goal, this is particularly difficult to achieve when straightforward scientific approaches such as experiments using random assignment are generally not feasible for ethical reasons.  Necessary, Sufficient, and Contributory Causes  Regardless of one’s theoretical perspective, several terms can be used to specify the role a factor plays in the   etiology , or causal pattern, of abnormal behavior. A   necessary cause  (e.g., cause X) is a condition that must exist for a disorder (e.g., disorder Y) to occur. For example, general paresis (Y)—a degenerative brain disorder—cannot develop unless a person has previously contracted syphilis (X). Or more generally, if Y occurs, then X must have preceded it. Another example is Huntington’s chorea—a rare degenerative brain disorder of the central nervous system—which can develop only if the person has the necessary gene (IT 15, or the Huntington’s gene—see  4). To date, most mental disorders have not been found to have necessary causes, although there con- tinues to be a search for such causes. A   sufficient cause   (e.g., cause X) of a disorder is a condition that guarantees the occurrence of a disorder (e.g., disorder Y). For example, one current theory hypothesizes that hopelessness (X) is a sufficient cause of depression (Y) (Abramson et al., 1995; Abramson et al., 1989). Or, more generally, if X occurs, then Y will also occur. According to this theory, if you are hopeless  3
enough about your future, then you will become depressed. However, a sufficient cause may not be a necessary cause. Continuing with the depression example, Abramson and col- leagues (1989) acknowledge that hopelessness is not a necessary cause of depression; there are other causes of depression as well. Finally, what we study most often in psychopathology research are   contributory causes . A contributory cause (e.g., cause X) is one that increases the probability of a disorder (e.g., disorder Y) developing but is neither necessary nor sufficient for the disorder to occur. Or, more generally, if X occurs, then the probability of Y occurring increases. For example, parental rejection could increase the probability that a child will later have difficulty in handling close personal relationships or could increase the prob- ability that being rejected in a relationship in adulthood will precipitate depression. We say here that parental rejection is a contributory cause for the person’s later difficulties, but it is nei- ther necessary nor sufficient (Abramson et al., 1989, 1995). See Figure 3.1 for a summary. In addition to distinguishing among necessary, sufficient, and contributory causes of abnormal behavior, we must also consider the time frame under which the different causes oper- ate. Some causal factors occurring relatively early in life may not show their effects for many years; these would be considered   distal causal factors   that may contribute to a predisposition to develop a disorder. For example, loss of a parent early in life, or having abusive or neglectful parents as a child or adolescent, may serve as a distal contributory cause predisposing a person to depression or antisocial behaviors later in life. By contrast, other causal factors operate shortly before the occurrence of the symptoms of a disor- der; these would be considered   proximal causal factors . Sometimes a proximal causal factor may be a condition that proves too much for a child or adult and triggers the onset of a disorder. A crush- ing disappointment at school or work or severe difficulties with a school friend or a marital partner are examples of more proximal causal factors that could lead to depression. In other cases, proxi- mal factors might involve biological changes such as damage to certain parts of the left hemisphere of the brain, which can lead to depression. A   reinforcing contributory cause   is a condition that tends to maintain maladaptive behavior that is already occurring. An example is the extra attention, sympathy, and relief from unwanted responsibility that may come when a person is ill; these pleasant experiences may unintentionally discourage recov- ery. Another example occurs when a depressed person’s behavior alienates friends and family, leading to a greater sense of rejection that reinforces the existing depression (Joiner, 2002; Joiner & Timmons, 2009). For many forms of psychopathology, we do not yet have a clear understanding of whether there are necessary or sufficient causes, although answering this question remains the goal of much current research. We do, however, have a good under- standing of many of the contributory causes for most forms of psychopathology. Some of the distal contributory causes, to be discussed later in this chapter, set up vulnerability during childhood to some disorder later in life. Other more proximal contributory causes appear to bring on a disorder directly, and still others may contribute to maintenance of a disorder. This complex causal picture is further complicated by the fact that what may be a proximal cause for a problem at one stage in life may also serve as a distal contributory cause that sets up a predis- position for another disorder later in life. For example, the death of a parent can be a proximal cause of a child’s subsequent grief reaction, which might last a few months or a year; however, the parent’s death may also serve as a distal contributory factor that increases the probability that when the child grows up he or she will become depressed in response to certain stressors.  Feedback and Bidirectionality in Abnormal Behavior  Traditionally in the sciences, the task of determining cause- and-effect relationships has focused on isolating the condition X (cause) that can be demonstrated to lead to condition  figure   3.1  Abnormal Behavior: Types of Causes.  Necessary Cause   If Disorder Y occurs, then Cause X must have preceded it. Sucient Cause   If Cause X occurs, then Disorder Y will also occur. Contributory Cause   If X occurs, then the probability of Disorder Y increases.  The loss of a parent at an early age may be a contributory cause for a child to develop depression in adulthood. Factors that may not show their effects for many years are called distal causal factors.
Y (effect). For example, when the alcohol content of the blood reaches a certain level, alcoholic intoxication occurs. When more than one causal factor is involved, as is often the case, the term  causal pattern   is used. Here, conditions A, B, C, and so on lead to condition Y. In either case, this concept of cause follows a simple linear model in which a given variable or set of variables leads to a result either immediately or later. In the behavioral sci- ences, however, not only do we usually deal with a multitude of interacting causes but we also often have difficulty distinguishing between what is cause and what is effect because effects can serve as feedback that can in turn influence the causes. In other words, the effects of feedback and the existence of mutual, two-way (bidirectional) influences must be taken into account. Consider the following example, which illustrates that our concepts of causal relationships must take into account the com- plex factors of bidirectionality of feedback.  Perceived Hostility   A boy with a history of disturbed interactions with his parents routinely misinterprets the intentions of his peers as being hostile. He develops defensive strategies to counteract the supposed hostility of those around him such as rejecting the efforts of others to be friendly, which he misinter- prets as patronizing. Confronted by the boy’s prickly behavior, those around him become defensive, hostile, and rejecting, thus confirming and strengthening the boy’s distorted expectations. In this manner, each opportunity for new experience and new learning is in fact subverted and becomes yet another encounter with a social environment that seems perversely and persistently hostile—exactly in line with the boy’s expectations.  Diathesis-Stress Models  A predisposition toward developing a disorder is termed a   diathe- sis . It can derive from biological, psychological, or sociocultural causal factors, and the different viewpoints that we will be discussing tend to emphasize the importance of different kinds of diatheses. Many mental disorders are believed to develop when some kind of stressor operates on a person who has a diathesis or   vulnerability   for that disorder. Hence we will discuss what are commonly known as   diathesis-stress models   of abnormal behavior (e.g., Ingram & Luxton, 2005; Meehl, 1962; Monroe & Simons, 1991). To translate these terms into the types of causal factors described earlier, the diathesis or vulnerability results from one or more relatively distal necessary or contributory causes, but is generally not sufficient to cause the disorder. Instead, there generally must be a more proximal undesirable event or situation (the stressor), which may also be contributory or necessary but is generally not sufficient by itself to cause the disorder except in someone with the diathesis.  Stress , the response or experience of an individual to demands that he or she perceives as taxing or exceeding his or her personal resources (Folkman & Moskovitz, 2004; Monroe et al., 2009; Taylor & Stanton, 2007), will be the focus of Chapter 5. It usually occurs when an individual experiences chronic or episodic events that are undesirable and lead to behavioral, physiological, and cognitive accom- modations (Baum & Posluszny, 1999). It is important to note that factors contributing to the development of a diathesis are themselves sometimes highly potent stressors, as when a child experiences the death of a parent and may thereby acquire a predisposition or diathesis for becoming depressed later in life. Researchers have proposed several different ways that a dia- thesis and stress may combine to produce a disorder (Ingram & Luxton, 2005; Monroe & Simons, 1991). In what is called the  additive model , individuals who have a high level of a diathesis may need only a small amount of stress before a disorder devel- ops, but those who have a very low level of a diathesis may need to experience a large amount of stress for a disorder to develop. In other words, the diathesis and the stress sum together, and when one is high the other can be low, and vice versa; thus, a person with no diathesis or a very low level of diathesis could still develop a disorder when faced with truly severe stress. In what is called an   interactive model , some amount of diathesis must be present before stress will have any effect. Thus, in the interactive model, someone with no diathesis will never develop the disor- der, no matter how much stress he or she experiences, whereas someone with the diathesis will show increasing likelihood of developing the disorder with increasing levels of stress. More complex models are also possible because diatheses often exist on a continuum, ranging from zero to high levels. Each of these possibilities is illustrated in Figure 3.2. Since the late 1980s, attention has been focused on the con- cept of   protective factors , which are influences that modify a person’s response to environmental stressors, making it less likely that the person will experience the adverse consequences of the stressors (Cicchetti & Garmezy, 1993; Masten et al., 2004; Rutter, 2006a, 2011). One important protective factor in child- hood is having a family environment in which at least one parent is warm and supportive, allowing the development of a good attachment relationship between the child and parent that can protect against the harmful effects of an abusive parent (Masten & Coatsworth, 1998). Ordinarily, protective factors operate only to help resist against the effects of a risk factor rather than to pro- vide any benefits to people without risk factors (Rutter, 2006a). Protective factors are not necessarily positive experiences. Indeed, sometimes exposure to stressful experiences that are dealt with successfully can promote a sense of self-confidence or self-esteem and thereby serve as a protective factor; thus some stressors paradoxically promote coping. This “steeling” or “inoculation” effect is more likely to occur with moderate stressors than with mild or extreme stressors (Barlow, 2002; Hetherington, 1991; Rutter, 1987). And some protective factors have nothing to do with experiences at all but are simply some quality or attribute of a person. For example, some protective
attributes include an easygoing temperament, high self-esteem, high intelligence, and school achievement, all of which can help protect against a variety of stressors (Masten, 2001; Rutter, 1987; Sapienza & Masten, 2011). Protective factors most often, but not always, lead to  resilience —the ability to adapt successfully to even very dif- ficult circumstances. An example is the child who perseveres and does well in school despite his or her parent’s drug addiction or physical abuse (Garmezy, 1993; Luthar, 2003; Sapienza & Masten, 2011). More generally, the term   resilience   has been used to describe the phenomenon that “some individuals have a rela- tively good outcome despite suffering risk experiences that would be expected to bring about serious sequelae” (Rutter, 2007, p. 205). A more everyday way of thinking of resilience is in terms of “overcoming the odds” against you. There is increasing evi- dence that if a child’s fundamental systems of adaptation (such as intelligence and cognitive development, ability to self-regulate, motivation to achieve mastery, effective parenting, and well-func- tioning neurobiological systems for handling stress) are operating normally, then most threatening circumstances will have minimal impact on him or her (Masten, 2001; Sapienza & Masten, 2011). Problems tend to arise when one or more of these systems of adaptation is weak to begin with (e.g., low intelligence or poorly functioning neurobiological systems for handling stress; Lester et al., 2006) or when a serious stressor damages one or more of these systems (e.g., when a parent dies). Problems can also arise when the level of challenge far exceeds human capacity to adapt (e.g., exposure to chronic trauma in war or chronic maltreatment in abusive families; Cicchetti, 2004; Cicchetti & Toth, 2005; Masten & Coatsworth, 1998; Sapienza & Masten, 2011). We should also note, however, that resilience should not be thought of as an all-or-none capacity, and some research has shown that resilient children (that is, those who show high social competence despite high stress) may nonetheless also experience considerable self-reported emotional distress. Moreover, children who show resilience in one domain may show significant difficulties in other domains. In sum, we can distinguish between causes of abnormal behavior that lie within and are part of the biological makeup or prior experience of a person—diatheses, vulnerabilities, or predispositions—and causes that pertain to current challenges in a person’s life—stressors. Typically, neither the diathesis nor the stress is by itself sufficient to cause the disorder, but in combination they can sometimes lead the individual to behave abnormally. In addition, we can also examine protective fac- tors, which may derive either from particular types of experi- ences or from certain qualities of the person, that can promote  figure   3.2  Diathesis-Stress Model.   (a) Interactive model of diathesis-stress interac- tion. (b) Additive model of diathesis-stress interaction.  Source: Adapted from S. M. Monroe & A. D. Simons (1991). Diathesis-stress theories in the context of life stress research: Implications for the depressive disorders.   Psychological Bulletin , 110, 406–25.  (a)  High Low  Probability of Depression Level of Stress  High Low High Level of Diathesis No Diathesis High Low  Probability of Depression Level of Stress  High Low High Level of Diathesis Medium Level of Diathesis No Diathesis (b) Medium Level of Diathesis  A child growing up under conditions of adversity may be protected from problems later in life if he or she has a warm and supportive relationship with some adult—such as a grandmother. Encouraging children to ask questions, taking the time to listen to their problems and concerns, and trying to understand the conflicts and pressures they face are the impor- tant elements of such a supportive and protective relationship.
resilience in the face of vulnerability and stress. The following hypothetical but highly plausible scenario nicely illustrates these concepts.  Nature and Nurture   Melinda and Tracy were identi- cal twins whose parents were killed in a car accident when they were a year old. Their mother and grandmother both had histo- ries of recurrent clinical depression. The twins were adopted into two loving middle-class families without a history of depression. Melinda’s adoptive family provided a loving and supportive envi- ronment and supported her through school and college. Tracy’s adoptive parents, by contrast, soon divorced, and she was raised by her adoptive mother, who developed a serious dependence on alcohol and who could not hold a job. Her mother’s living cir- cumstances deteriorated and Tracy was forced to change schools four times. Because of her adoptive mother’s alcohol and other mental problems, she was unable to provide Tracy with a consistently loving and supportive environment, and when she was drunk she frequently punished Tracy for no good rea- son. Tracy somehow managed to graduate from high school and supported herself through a state college. Both Tracy and Melinda married after they graduated from college but, by age 27, both marriages resulted in divorce. Although Melinda devel- oped some depressive symptoms for the first 6 weeks following the divorce, the depression was not severe and she quickly recovered. Tracy, by contrast, developed a major depressive epi- sode that lasted for over a year.  In this example, both Tracy and Melinda have identical genetic makeup and therefore the same genetic diathesis for depression. Both had experienced the same distal stressor (death of parents at an early age), and the same proximal stressor (divorce) at age 27. But Melinda had many protec- tive factors growing up (loving and supportive family and adequate resources) that Tracy did not have (lack of a lov- ing and supportive mother and inadequate resources). Thus Melinda showed resilience in the face of her divorce but Tracy did not. Different models of abnormal behavior, as we shall see in the sections that follow, identify different diatheses and different stressors as the route to abnormality and different protective fac- tors as the route to resilience in the face of adversity. This discussion should make it very clear that diathesis- stress models need to be considered in a broad framework of  multicausal developmental models . Specifically, in the course of development a child may acquire a variety of cumulative risk factors that may interact in determining his or her risk for psy- chopathology. These risk factors also interact, however, with a variety of protective processes, and sometimes with stressors, to determine whether the child develops in a normal and adaptive way—as opposed to showing signs of maladaptive behavior and psychopathology—in childhood, adolescence, or adult- hood (e.g., Rutter, 2001, 2006a; Sapienza & Masten, 2011). It is also important to note, however, that to understand what is abnormal, one must always have a good understanding of normal human development at biological, psychological, and sociocultural levels of analysis. This has been the focus of the rapidly growing field of   developmental psychopathol- ogy , which focuses on determining what is abnormal at any point in development by comparing and contrasting it with the normal and expected changes that occur in the course of development (e.g., Masten, 2006; Rutter, 2001). For example, an intense fear of the dark in a 3- to 5-year-old child may not be considered abnormal, given that most children have at least one specific fear that they bring into early adolescence (Antony et al., 1997; Barlow, 2002). However, an intense fear of the dark that causes considerable distress and avoidance behavior in a high school or college-age student would be considered a phobia.  in review  •   What is a necessary cause? a sufficient cause? a contributory cause?  •   What is a diathesis-stress model of abnormal behavior?  •   Define the terms   protective factors   and   resilience.   Give exam- ples of each.  •   Explain why diathesis-stress models need to be considered as multicausal developmental models.  Viewpoints for Understanding the Causes of Abnormal Behavior  Students are often perplexed by the fact that in the behavioral sciences there often are several competing explanations for the same thing. In general, the more complex the phenomenon being investigated, the greater the number of viewpoints that develop in an attempt to explain it, although inevitably they are not all equally valid. In each case, a particular viewpoint helps researchers and theoreticians to organize the observations they have made, provides a system of thought in which to place the observed data, and suggests areas of focus for research and treat- ment. In a fundamental way, viewpoints also help determine the kinds of potential causes that are even examined in the first place. It is important to remember, however, that each of these viewpoints is a theoretical construction devised to orient psy- chologists in the study of abnormal (and normal) behavior. One potential problem is that when adherents of a particular view- point are overly confident about the validity of that viewpoint, they may become blind to alternative interpretations. As we saw in Chapter 2, Sigmund Freud helped shift the focus of abnormal psychology from biological illness or moral infirmity to unconscious mental processes within the person. In recent years, three other shifts in focus seem to have been occur- ring in parallel in the study of abnormal behavior. First, a newer, slightly different biological viewpoint is having a significant
impact; it is the dominant force in psychiatry and has become very influential in clinical science more generally. Second, the behavioral and cognitive-behavioral viewpoints have become very influential paradigms among many empirically oriented clinical psychologists and some psychiatrists. Third, a sociocul- tural viewpoint has also become influential among psychologists and psychiatrists interested in the effects of sociocultural factors on abnormal behavior. In the long run, however, we also know from biological, psychological, and sociocultural research that only an integrated approach is likely to provide anything close to a full understanding of the origins of various forms of psy- chopathology or the form that a long-lasting cure for many seri- ous forms of psychopathology might take. Thus, in recent years, many theorists have come to recognize the need for a more integrative,   biopsychosocial viewpoint   that acknowledges that biological, psychological, and sociocultural factors all interact and play a role in psychopathology and treatment. With this in mind, we now turn to the major different viewpoints themselves. We will present the key ideas of each perspective, along with information about attempts to evaluate its validity. We will also describe the kinds of causal factors that each model tends to emphasize.  in review  •   What are the three traditional viewpoints that have dominated the study of abnormal behavior in recent years?  •   What is the central idea of the more current biopsychosocial viewpoint?  The Biological Viewpoint and Biological Causal Factors  As we saw in Chapter 2 in the discussion of general paresis and its link to syphilis, the traditional biological viewpoint focuses on mental disorders as diseases, many of the primary symptoms of which are cognitive, emotional, or behavioral. Mental disor- ders are thus viewed as disorders of the central nervous system, the autonomic nervous system, and/or the endocrine system that are either inherited or caused by some pathological process. At one time, people who adopted this viewpoint hoped to find simple biological explanations. Today, however, most clinical psychologists and psychiatrists recognize that such explanations are rarely simple, and many also acknowledge that psychological and sociocultural causal factors play important roles as well. The disorders first recognized as having biological or organic components were those associated with gross destruction of brain tissue. These disorders are neurological diseases—that is, they result from the disruption of brain functioning by physical or biochemical means and often involve psychological or behavioral aberrations. For example, damage to certain areas in the brain can cause memory loss, and damage to the left hemisphere that occurs during a stroke can cause depression. However, most mental disorders are not caused by neurological damage per se. For example, abnormalities in neurotransmitter systems in the brain can lead to mental dis- orders without causing damage to the brain. Moreover, the bizarre content of delusions and other abnormal mental states like hallucinations can never be caused simply and directly by brain damage. Consider the example of a person with schizophrenia or general paresis who claims to be Napoleon. The content of such delusions must be the byproduct of some sort of functional integration of different neural structures, some of which have been “programmed” by personality and learning based on past experience (e.g., having learned who Napoleon was). We will focus here on four categories of biological factors (summarized in Figure 3.3) that seem particularly relevant to the development of maladaptive behavior: (1) neurotransmitter and hormonal abnormalities in the brain or other parts of the central nervous system, (2) genetic vulnerabilities, (3) temperament, and (4) brain dysfunction and neural plasticity. Each of these categories encompasses a number of conditions that influence the quality and functioning of our bodies and our behavior. They are often not independent of each other but rather interact with one another. Moreover, different factors may play more or less important roles in different people.  Imbalances of Neurotransmitters and Hormones  In order for the brain to function adequately, neurons, or nerve cells, need to be able to communicate effectively with one another. This communication is done through the transmission of nerve impulses which are electrical in nature. Nerve impulses travel from the cell body or dendrites of one neuron (nerve cell) down the axon. Although there is only one axon for each neuron, axons have branches at their ends called axon endings. These are the sites where neurotransmitter substances are released into the  synapse —a tiny fluid-filled space between the axon endings of one neuron (the presynaptic neuron) and the dendrites or cell body of another neuron (the postsynaptic neuron). The synapse is the site of communication between the axon of one neuron and the dendrites or cell body of another. These interneuronal transmissions are accomplished by   neurotransmitters —chemical substances that are released into the synapse by the presynaptic  figure   3.3  Biological Causal Factors.  •   Neurotransmitter and hormonal abnormalities  •   Genetic vulnerabilities  •   Temperament  •   Brain dysfunction and neural plasticity
neuron when a nerve impulse occurs (for details, see Figure 3.4). The neurotransmitter substances released into the synapse then act on the postsynaptic membrane of the dendrite (or cell body) of the receiving neuron, which has specialized receptor sites where the neurotransmitter substances pass on their message. The neurotransmitters can stimulate that postsynaptic neuron to either initiate an impulse or inhibit impulse transmission. Both kinds of messages are important. Once the neurotransmitter substance is released into the synapse, it does not stay around indefinitely (otherwise, the receiving neuron would continue firing in the absence of a real impulse). Sometimes the neurotransmitters are quickly destroyed by an enzyme such as monoamine oxidase, and sometimes they are returned to storage vesicles in the axon endings by a reuptake mechanism—a process of reabsorption by which the neurotrans- mitters are reabsorbed or effectively sucked back up into the axon ending. The enzyme monoamine oxidase is also present in the presynaptic terminal and can destroy excess neurotransmitter there too. There are many different kinds of neurotrans- mitters; some increase the likelihood that the post- synaptic neuron will “fire” (produce an impulse), and others inhibit the impulse. Whether the neural message is successfully transmitted to the postsyn- aptic neuron depends, among other things, on the concentration of certain neurotransmitters within the synapse.  IMBAlANCeS oF NeuroTrANSMITTer SySTeMS   The belief that imbalances in neurotrans- mitters in the brain can result in abnormal behavior is one of the basic tenets of the biological perspective today, although currently most researchers agree that this is only part of the causal pattern involved in the etiology of most disorders. Sometimes psychological stress can bring on   neurotransmitter imbalances . These imbalances can be created in a variety of ways:  • There may be excessive production and release  of the neurotransmitter substance into the syn- apses, causing a functional excess in levels of that neurotransmitter.  • There may be dysfunctions in the normal pro - cesses by which neurotransmitters, once released into the synapse, are deactivated. Ordinarily this deactivation occurs either through a process of reuptake of the released neurotransmitter from the synapse into the axon endings or through a pro- cess of degradation by certain enzymes that may be present in the synapse and in the presynaptic axon endings.  • Finally, there may be problems with the receptors  in the postsynaptic neuron, which may be either abnormally sensitive or abnormally insensitive. Neurons that are sensitive to a particular neurotransmitter tend to cluster together, forming neural paths between different parts of the brain known as   chemical circuits . As we will see, dif- ferent disorders are thought to stem from different patterns of neurotransmitter imbalances in various brain areas (e.g., Lambert & Kinsley, 2005; Thompson, 2000). Different medications used to treat various disorders are often believed to operate by correcting these imbalances. For example, the widely prescribed antidepressants Prozac and Zoloft appear to slow the reuptake of the neurotransmitter serotonin, thereby prolonging how long serotonin remains in the synapse (see Chapters 7 and 16). Although over a hundred neurotransmitters have been dis- covered to date, five different kinds of neurotransmitters have been most extensively studied in relationship to psychopathology: (1) norepinephrine, (2) dopamine, (3) serotonin, (4) glutamate, and (5) gamma aminobutyric acid (known as GABA; Carlson, 2007; Lambert & Kinsley, 2005; Thompson, 2000). The first three belong to a class of neurotransmitters called   monoamines  figure   3.4  Neurotransmission and Abnormal Behavior.   Watch   the   video  The Basics: How the Brain Works   in   MyPsychLab  Electrical impulse Axon Axon Axon Cell body Cell body Dendrites Dendrites  Dendrite or cell body  Nucleus Axon ending (button) Axon endings (buttons) Impulse Synapse Synapse Receptor sites Vesicle releasing neurotransmitter Neurotransmitter released– chemical message Electrical impulse initiated or inhibited Neurotransmitter in vesicle Monoamine oxidase for deactivation Postsynaptic neuron Postsynaptic neuron Presynaptic neuron Presynaptic neuron Synapse, enlarged
because each is synthesized from a single amino acid ( monoamine  means “one amine”). Norepinephrine has been implicated as playing an important role in the emergency reactions our bodies show when we are exposed to an acutely stressful or dangerous situation, as well as in attention, orientation, and basic motives (see Chapters 5 and 6). Some of the functions of dopamine include pleasure and cognitive processing, and it has been impli- cated in schizophrenia (see  3) as well as in addictive disorders (see  1). Serotonin has been found to have important effects on the way we think and process information from our environment as well as on behaviors and moods. Not surprisingly, then, it seems to play an important role in emotional disorders such as anxiety and depression, as well as in suicide, as we will see in Chapters 6 and 7. In  3 we discuss the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate, which has been impli- cated in schizophrenia. Finally, in Chapter 6, we discuss the neurotransmitter GABA, which is strongly implicated in reducing anxiety as well as other emotional states characterized by high levels of arousal. Each will be discussed at greater length when the relevant disorders are discussed. Given that many forms of psychopathology have been associ- ated with various abnormalities in neurotransmitter functioning and with altered sensitivities of receptor sites, it is not surprising that many of the medications used to treat various disorders have the synapse as their site of action. For example, certain medica- tions act to increase or decrease the concentrations of pertinent neurotransmitters in the synaptic gap. They may do so by blocking the reuptake process, by altering the sensitivity of the receptor sites, or by affecting the actions of the enzymes that ordinarily break down the neurotransmitter substances. Medications that facilitate the effects of a neurotransmitter on the postsynaptic neuron are called   agonists , and those that oppose or inhibit the effects of a neu- rotransmitter on a postsynaptic neuron are called   antagonists.  HorMoNAl IMBAlANCeS   Some forms of psychopathology have also been linked to   hormonal imbalances .   Hormones   are chemical messengers secreted by a set of endocrine glands in our bodies. Each of the endocrine glands produces and releases its own set of hormones directly into our bloodstream. The hor- mones then travel and directly affect target cells in various parts of our brain and body, influencing diverse events such as fight- or-flight reactions, sexual responses, physical growth, and many other physical expressions of mental states. Our central nervous system is linked to the endocrine system (in what is known as the   neuroendocrine system ) by the effects of the hypothalamus on the   pituitary gland , which is the master gland of the body, pro- ducing a variety of hormones that regulate or control the other endocrine glands (see Figure 3.5). One particularly important set of interactions occurs in the  hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA axis) . Activation of this axis involves: 1. Messages in the form of corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) travel from the hypothalamus to the pituitary. 2. In response to CRH, the pituitary releases adrenocortico- trophic hormone (ACTH), which stimulates the cortical part of the adrenal gland (located on top of the kidney) to produce epinephrine (adrenaline) and the stress hormone  cortisol , which are released into general circulation. Cortisol mobilizes the body to deal with stress. 3. Cortisol in turn provides negative feedback to the hypo- thalamus and pituitary to decrease their release of CRH and ACTH, which in turn reduces the release of adrenaline and cortisol. This negative feedback system operates much as a thermostat does to regulate temperature. As we will see, malfunctioning of this negative feedback system has been implicated in various forms of psychopathology such as depression and posttraumatic stress disorder. Sex hormones are produced by the gonadal glands, and imbalance in these (such as the male hormones, the   androgens ) can also contribute to maladaptive behavior. Moreover, gonadal hormonal influences on the developing nervous system also seem to contribute to some of the differences between behavior in men and in women (e.g., Hayward, 2003; Hines, 2004; Money & Ehrhardt, 1972).  Hypothalmus Pituitary gland Thyroid gland Adrenal glands Ovary (female) Testis (male) Gonads  figure   3.5  Major Glands of the endocrine System.   This figure illustrates some of the major glands of the endocrine system, which produce and release hormones into the bloodstream. The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is also shown (blue arrows). The hypothalamus and pituitary are closely connected, and the hypothalamus periodically sends hormone signals to the pituitary (the master gland), which in turn sends another hormone to the cortical part of the adrenal glands (above the kidneys) to release epi- nephrine and the stress hormone cortisol.   Simulate   the  Experiment   The Endocrine System   in   MyPsychLab
Genetic Vulnerabilities  The biochemical processes described above are themselves affected by   genes , which consist of very long molecules of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and are present at various locations on chromosomes.   Chromosomes   are the chain-like structures within a cell nucleus that contain the genes. Genes are the carri- ers of genetic information that we inherit from our parents and other ancestors, and each gene exists in two or more alternate forms called   alleles . Although neither behavior nor mental disor- ders are ever determined exclusively by genes, there is substantial evidence that most mental disorders show at least some genetic influence ranging from small to large (e.g., Plomin et al., 2008; Rutter, 2006a). Some of these genetic influences, such as broad temperamental features, are first apparent in newborns and children. For example, some children are just naturally more shy or anxious, whereas others are more outgoing (e.g., Carey & DiLalla, 1994; Fox et al., 2010; Kagan & Fox, 2006). However, some genetic sources of vulnerability do not manifest themselves until adolescence or adulthood, when most mental disorders appear for the first time. Healthy human cells have 46 chromosomes containing genetic materials that encode the hereditary plan for each indi- vidual, providing the potentialities for development and behavior of that individual throughout a lifetime. The normal inheritance consists of 23 pairs of chromosomes, one of each pair from the mother and one from the father. Twenty-two of these chromosome pairs determine, by their biochemical action, an individual’s general anatomical and other physiological character- istics. The remaining pair, the   sex chromosomes , determine the individual’s sex. In a female, both of these sex chromosomes—one from each par- ent—are designated as X chromosomes. In a male, the sex chromosome from the mother is an X, but that from the father is a Y chromo- some (see Figure 3.6). Research in developmental genetics has shown that abnormalities in the structure or number of the chromosomes can be associated with major defects or disorders. For example, Down syndrome is a type of intellectual dis- ability (also associated with recognizable facial features such as a flat face and slanted eyes) in which there is a trisomy (a set of three chro- mosomes instead of two) in chromosome 21 (see  5). Here the extra chromosome is the primary cause of the disorder. Anoma- lies may also occur in the sex chromosomes, producing a variety of complications, such as ambiguous sexual characteristics, that may predispose a person to develop abnormal behavior. More typically, however, personality traits and mental disorders are not affected by chromosomal abnormalities per se. Instead they are more often influenced either by abnor- malities in some of the genes on the chromosomes or by natu- rally occurring variations of genes known as   polymorphisms . Although you will often hear about discoveries that “the gene” for a particular disorder has been discovered, vulnerabili- ties to mental disorders are almost always   polygenic , which means they are influenced by multiple genes or by multiple polymorphisms of genes, with any one gene having only very small effects (Kendler, 2005; Plomin et al., 2008). In other words, a genetically vulnerable person has usually inherited a large number of genes, or polymorphisms of genes, that oper- ate together in some sort of additive or interactive fashion to increase vulnerability (e.g., Kendler, 2005; Plomin et al., 2008; Rutter, 2006b). Collectively these genes may, for example, lead to structural abnormalities in the central nervous system, to abnormalities in the regulation of brain chemistry and hor- monal balance, or to excesses or deficiencies in the reactivity of the autonomic nervous system, which is involved in mediating many of our emotional responses. In the field of abnormal psychology, genetic influences rarely express themselves in a simple and straightforward man- ner. This is because behavior, unlike some physical characteris- tics such as eye color, is not determined exclusively by genetic endowment; it is a product of the organism’s interaction with  figure   3.6  Human Chromosome Pairs.   A normal human male has 23 pairs of chromosomes, including an X chromosome and a Y chromosome.  Source: “Human Chromosome Pairs,” from Thomas D. Gelehrter et al. (1998).   Principles of Medical Genetics . Reprinted with permission of Lippincott/Williams & Wilkins and Dr. Thomas D. Gelehrter.
the environment. In other words, genes can affect behavior only indirectly. Gene “expression” is normally not a simple outcome of the information encoded in DNA but is, rather, the end product of an intricate process that may be influenced by the internal (e.g., intrauterine) and external environment. Indeed, certain genes can actually be “turned on,” or activated, and “turned off,” or deactivated, in response to environmen- tal influences such as stress (e.g., Plomin et al., 2008; Rutter, 2006b).  THe relATIoNSHIP oF GeNoTyPeS To PHeNoTyPeS   A person’s total genetic endowment is referred to as her or his  genotype   and, except for identical twins, no two humans ever begin life with the same endowment. The observed structural and functional characteristics that result from an interaction of the genotype and the environment are referred to as a person’s  phenotype . In some cases, the genotypic vulnerability present at birth does not exert its effect on the phenotype until much later in life. In many other cases, the genotype may shape the envi- ronmental experiences a child has, thus affecting the phenotype in yet another very important way. For example, a child who is genetically predisposed to aggressive behavior may be rejected by his or her peers in early grades because of the aggressive behav- ior. Such rejection may lead the child to go on to associate with similarly aggressive and delinquent peers in later grades, leading to an increased likelihood of developing a full-blown pattern of delinquency in adolescence. When the genotype shapes the en- vironmental experiences a child has in this way, we refer to this phenomenon as a   genotype–environment correlation   (Plomin et al., 2008; Rutter, 2006, 2007).  GeNoTyPe–eNVIroNMeNT CorrelATIoNS   Researchers have found three important ways in which an individual’s geno- type may shape his or her environment (Jang, 2005; Plomin et al., 2008, 2013). 1. The child’s genotype may have what has been termed a   pas- sive effect   on the environment, resulting from the genetic similarity of parents and children. For example, highly intel- ligent parents may provide a highly stimulating environ- ment for their child, thus creating an environment that will interact in a positive way with the child’s genetic endow- ment for high intelligence. Conversely, parents who exhibit antisocial behavior tend to create a risky environment characterized by family dysfunction, thereby increasing the probability of certain mental disorders in their children (e.g., Rutter, 2006b; see also  0). 2. The child’s genotype may evoke particular kinds of reactions from the social and physical environment—a so-called   evoc- ative effect . For example, active, happy babies evoke more positive responses from others than do passive, unresponsive infants (Lytton, 1980). Similarly, musically talented chil- dren may be picked out at school and given special opportu- nities (Plomin et al., 2008, 2013). 3. The child’s genotype may play a more active role in shap- ing the environment—a so-called   active effect . In this case the child seeks out or builds an environment that is congenial—a phenomenon known as “niche building.” For example, extraverted children may seek the company of others, for example, thereby enhancing their own tenden- cies to be sociable (Baumrind, 1991; Plomin et al., 2008, 2013).  GeNoTyPe–eNVIroNMeNT INTerACTIoNS   With the type of genotype–environment correlations just discussed, we see the effects that genes have on a child’s exposure to the en- vironment. But an additional, fascinating complication is that people with different genotypes may be differentially sensitive or susceptible to their environments; this is known as a   genotype– environment interaction . One important example is illustrated by a disorder known as PKU-induced intellectual disability (see  5). Children with the genetic vulnerability to PKU react very differently to many common foods with phenylalanine than do normal children because they cannot metabolize the phenylalanine (an amino acid), and as its metabolic products build up, they damage the brain (Plomin et al., 2008, 2013; Rutter, 2006b). Fortunately, this mental retardation syndrome can be prevented if the young child’s diet is changed so as to eliminate foods with phenylalanine. Another example occurs in people at genetic risk for depres- sion, who have been shown to be more likely to respond to stressful life events by becoming depressed than are people with- out the genetic risk factors who experience the same stressful life events (Kendler, Kessler, et al., 1995; Moffitt, Caspi, & Rutter, 2005, 2006; Silberg, Rutter, Neale & Eaves, 2001). In one landmark study of nearly 850 young adults who had been fol- lowed since age 3, investigators found evidence for a genotype– environment interaction involving several variants on a specific gene involved in the transport of the neurotransmitter serotonin. Which of two variants of this gene a person had affected the likelihood that she or he would develop major depression in her or his 20s, but only when considered in interaction with life stress (Caspi et al., 2003). Specifically, individuals with one vari- ant of the gene (two short alleles) who also experienced four or more major life stressors had twice the probability of developing major depression than individuals with another variant of the gene (two long alleles) who also experienced four or more major life stressors (see Chapter 7 for more details). Since then, this basic pattern of results has been replicated in many studies (and not in others), but recent evidence suggests that the effects are robust if sophisticated interview-based measures of life stress (not checklists) are used (Uher & McGuffin, 2010; see also Karg et al., 2011).  MeTHoDS For STuDyING GeNeTIC INFlueNCeS   Al- though advances are beginning to be made in identifying faulty genetic endowment, for the most part we are not yet able to
isolate, on the genes themselves, specific defects for mental dis- orders. Therefore, most of the information we have on the role of genetic factors in mental disorders is based not on studies of genes but on studies of people who are related to each other. Three primary methods have traditionally been used in   behavior genetics , the field that focuses on studying the heritability of mental disorders (as well as other aspects of psychological func- tioning): (1) the family history (or pedigree) method, (2) the twin method, and (3) the adoption method. More recently, two additional methods, linkage studies and association studies, have also been developed. The   family history   (or pedigree)   method   requires that an investigator observe samples of relatives of each   proband   or   index case   (the subject, or carrier, of the trait or disorder in question) to see whether the incidence increases in proportion to the degree of hereditary relationship. In addition, the incidence of the dis- order in a normal population is compared (as a control) with its incidence among the relatives of the index cases. The main limitation of this method is that people who are more closely related genetically also tend to share more similar environments, which makes it difficult to disentangle genetic and environmen- tal effects. The   twin method   is the second approach used to study genetic influences on abnormal behavior.   Identical (monozy- gotic) twins   share the same genetic endowment because they develop from a single zygote, or fertilized egg. Thus if a given disorder or trait were completely heritable, one would expect the   concordance rate —the percentage of twins sharing the disorder or trait—to be 100 percent. That is, if one identical twin had a particular disorder, the other twin would as well. However, there are no forms of psychopathology where the con- cordance rates for identical twins are this high, so we can safely conclude that no mental disorders are completely heritable. Nevertheless, as we will see, there are relatively high concor- dance rates for identical twins in some more severe forms of psychopathology. These concordance rates are particularly meaningful when they differ from those found for nonidenti- cal twins.   Nonidentical (dizygotic )   twins   do not share any more genes than do siblings from the same parents because they develop from two different fertilized eggs. One would therefore expect concordance rates for a disorder to be much lower for dizygotic (DZ) than for monozygotic (MZ) twins if the disor- der had a strong genetic component. Thus evidence for genetic transmission of a trait or a disorder can be obtained by compar- ing the concordance rates between identical and nonidentical twins. For most of the disorders we will discuss, concordance rates are indeed much lower for nonidentical twins than for identical twins. Some researchers have argued that finding higher concor- dance rates for a disorder in monozygotic twins than in dizy- gotic twins is not conclusive evidence of a genetic contribution because it is always possible that identical twins are treated more similarly by their parents and others than are nonidentical twins (Bouchard & Propping, 1993; Torgersen, 1993). However, research has provided reasonably strong evidence that the genetic similarity is more important than the similarity of the parents’ behavior (e.g., Hettema, Neale, & Kendler, 1995; Plomin et al., 2008, 2013; Rutter, 2006). Nevertheless, the ideal study of genetic factors in psychopathology involves identical twins who have been reared apart in significantly different environ- ments. Unfortunately, finding such twins is extremely difficult (there are probably only a few hundred pairs in the United States), and so only a few such small studies have been done. The third method used to study genetic influences is the  adoption method . This method capitalizes on the fact that adoption creates a situation in which individuals who do not share a common family environment are nonetheless geneti- cally related (e.g., Plomin et al., 2008, 2013). In one variation on this method, the biological parents of individuals who have a given disorder (and who were adopted away shortly after birth) are compared with the biological parents of individu- als without the disorder (who also were adopted away shortly after birth) to determine their rates of disorder. If there is a genetic influence, one expects to find higher rates of the disor- der in the biological relatives of those with the disorder than in those without the disorder. In another variation, researchers compare the rates of disorder in the adopted-away offspring of  This set of identical twins from Bouchard’s University of Minnesota Study of Twins Reared Apart pose here with Dr. Nancy Segal, co-director of the project. Mark Newman (left) and Gerry Levey (right) were separated at birth and raised by different parents. Both were dedicated firefighters in different New Jersey towns and met after someone mistook one of them at a firemen’s convention for his twin. Both had highly similar patterns of baldness and were 6’4” tall. They both loved Budweiser beer (which they both held by placing their pinky finger under the beer can) as well as Chinese and Italian food. Both had been smokers until recently, when one had quit. They both also liked hunting and fishing and always carried knives. These eerie similarities between identical twins reared apart have been observed in many other such twins as well (Segal, 2005).
biological parents who have a disorder with those seen in the adopted-away offspring of normal biological parents. If there is a genetic influence, then there should be higher rates of dis- order in the adopted-away offspring of the biological parents who have the disorder. Although pitfalls can arise in interpreting each of these meth- ods, if the results from studies using all three strategies converge, one can draw reasonably strong conclusions about the genetic influence on a disorder (Plomin et al., 2008; Rutter, 1991). The Developments in Thinking box below considers various miscon- ceptions about studies of genetics and psychopathology.  SePArATING GeNeTIC AND eNVIroNMeNTAl INFlueNCeS   Because all of the three types of heritability stud- ies separate heredity from environment to some extent, they also allow for testing the influence of environmental factors and even for differentiating “shared” and “nonshared” environmen- tal influences (Plomin & Daniels, 1987; Plomin et al., 2008, 2013; Rutter, 2006).   Shared environmental influences   are those that would make children in a family more similar, whether the influence occurs within the family (e.g., family discord and poverty) or in the environment (e.g., two high-quality schools, with one twin going to each).   Nonshared environmental influences  are those in which the children in a family differ. These would include unique experiences at school and also some unique fea- tures of upbringing in the home, such as a parent treating one child in a qualitatively different way from another. An example of nonshared influences occurs when parents who are quarreling and showing hostility to one another draw some children into the conflict while others are able to remain outside it (Plomin  developments in Thinking  Nature, Nurture, and Psychopathology: A New Look at an Old Topic  P eople have abundant misconceptions and stereotypes about studies of genetic influences on behavior, traits, and psychopathology, many stemming from outdated ideas that nature and nurture are separate rather than in con- stant interplay. Indeed, as we have seen in the examples of genotype–environment correlations and interactions, “In the great majority of cases, both psychological traits and mental disorders are multifactorial in origin—meaning that they involve some kind of combination, and interplay, among several ge- netic factors providing contributions to susceptibility or liability and several environmental factors that similarly play a part in the causal pathway” (Rutter, 2006, p. 29). Several of the more important misconceptions are presented here (Plomin et al., 2008; Rutter, 1991, 2006).  1.   Misconception:   Strong genetic effects mean that environ- mental influences must be unimportant.   Fact:   Even if we are discussing a trait or disorder that has a strong genetic influence, environmental factors can have a major impact on the level of that trait (Rutter, 2006). Height, for example, is strongly genetically determined, and yet nutritional fac- tors have a very large effect on the actual height a person attains. Between 1900 and 1960 the average height of boys reared in London increased about 4 inches, thanks only to improvements in diet (Tizard, 1975).  2.   Misconception:   Genes provide a limit to potential.   Fact:  One’s potential can change if one’s environment changes, as the height example above illustrates. Another example comes from children born to socially disadvantaged parents but who are adopted and reared with socially advantaged par- ents. These children have a mean IQ about 12 points higher than those reared in the socially disadvantaged environment (Capron & Duyme, 1989; see also Duyme et al., 2004).  3.   Misconception:   Genetic strategies are of no value for study- ing environmental influences.   Fact:   The opposite is true because genetic research strategies provide critical tests of environmental influences on personality and psychopathol- ogy (Rutter, 2006). For example, because monozygotic twins have identical genes, concordance rates of less than 100 percent clearly illustrate the importance of environmental influences (Bouchard & Loehlin, 2001; Rutter, 2006a).  4.   Misconception:   Genetic effects diminish with age.   Fact:  Although many people assume that genetic effects should be maximal at birth, with environmental influences getting stronger with increasing age, it is now evident that this is not always true (Plomin, 1986; Rutter, 2006). For height, weight, and IQ, dizygotic twins are almost as alike as monozygotic twins in early infancy, but over time dizygotic twins show greater differences than monozygotic twins. For whatever reasons, many genetic effects on psychological characteristics increase with age up to at least middle child- hood or even young adulthood. Moreover, other genetic effects do not appear until much later in life, as in cases like Huntington’s disease, to be discussed in  4.  5.   Misconception:   Disorders that run in families must be genetic, and those that do not run in families must not be genetic.   Fact:   Many examples contradict these misconcep- tions. For example, teenage-onset juvenile delinquency tends to run in families, and yet this seems to be due primarily to environmental rather than genetic influences (Plomin et al., 2008; Rutter, 2006a). Conversely, autism is such a rare disorder that it doesn’t appear to run in families (only about 3% of siblings have the disorder), and yet there seems to be a very powerful genetic effect (Plomin et al., 2008; Rutter, 2006a).
et al., 2008, 2013; Rutter, 2006a; Rutter et al., 1993). For many important psychological characteristics and forms of psy- chopathology, nonshared influences have appeared to be more important—that is, experiences that are specific to a child may do more to influence his or her behavior and adjustment than experiences shared by all children in the family (Plomin et al., 2008, 2013; Rutter, 1991, 2006).  lINkAGe ANAlySIS AND ASSoCIATIoN STuDIeS   More recent molecular genetic methods used to study genetic influ- ences on mental disorders include   linkage analysis   and   association studies . Whereas the methods previously described attempt to obtain quantitative estimates of the degree of genetic influence for different disorders, linkage analysis and association studies attempt to determine the actual location of genes responsible for mental disorders. Considerable excitement surrounds such work because identifying the location of genes for certain disorders could provide promising leads for new forms of treatment and even prevention of those disorders.  Linkage analysis   studies of mental disorders capitalize on several currently known locations on chromosomes of genes for other inherited physical characteristics or biological processes (such as eye color, blood group, etc.). For example, researchers might conduct a large family pedigree study on schizophrenia, looking at all known relatives of a person with schizophrenia going back several generations. At the same time, however, they might also keep track of something like the eye color of each individual (as well as which   DSM   diagnoses they have). Eye color might be chosen because it has a known genetic marker located on a particular chromosome. If the researchers found that the familial patterns for schizophrenia in one family pedigree (a sample of all relatives) were closely linked to the familial pat- terns for eye color in the same pedigree, they could infer that a gene affecting schizophrenia must be located very nearby on the chromosome that contains the known genetic marker for eye color. In other words, in this case one would expect all members of a particular family pedigree with schizophrenia to have the same eye color (e.g., blue), even though all members of a differ- ent family pedigree with schizophrenia might have brown eyes. A number of published studies over the past 20 years using linkage analysis have provided evidence supporting, for example, the location of a gene for bipolar disorder on chromosome 11 (e.g., Egeland et al., 1987) and the location of genes for schizo- phrenia on particular parts of chromosomes 22, 6, 8, and 1 (e.g., Heinrichs, 2001). However, numerous other studies have failed to replicate these results. Therefore, most results are considered inconclusive at the present time (e.g., Carey, 2003; Rutter, 2006). Part of the problem in coming up with replicable results in such studies is that most of these disorders are influenced by many different genes spread over multiple chromosomes. To date, these linkage analysis techniques have been most success- ful in locating the genes for single-gene brain disorders such as Huntington’s disease (Plomin et al., 2008, 2013; Rutter, 2006).  Association studies   start with two large groups of individu- als, one group with and one group without a given disorder. Researchers then compare the frequencies in these two groups of certain genetic markers that are known to be located on particu- lar chromosomes (such as eye color, blood group, etc.). If one or more of the known genetic markers occur with much higher frequency in the individuals with the disorder than in the people without the disorder, the researchers infer that one or more genes associated with the disorder are located on the same chro- mosome. Ideally, the search for gene candidates for a given dis- order starts with known genes for some biological process that is disrupted in the disorder (see Moffitt et al., 2005). For example, one study found that the genetic markers for certain aspects of dopamine functioning were present significantly more frequently in the children with hyperactivity than in the children without hyperactivity. This led researchers to infer that some of the genes involved with hyperactivity are located near the known genetic markers for dopamine functioning (Thapar et al., 2006; see also Plomin et al., 2008, 2013). For most mental disorders that are known to be influenced polygenically, association studies are more promising than linkage studies for identifying small effects of any particular gene. In summary, these molecular genetic studies using linkage and association methodologies hold tremendous promise for identifying new prevention or treatment approaches. However, at present that promise has not been fulfilled because of difficul- ties in producing replicable results.  Temperament  Temperament   refers to a child’s reactivity and characteristic ways of self-regulation. When we say that babies differ in tempera- ment, we mean that they show differences in their characteristic emotional and arousal responses to various stimuli and in their tendency to approach, withdraw, or attend to various situations (Rothbart, Derryberry, & Hershey, 2000). Some babies are star- tled by slight sounds or cry when sunlight hits their faces; others are seemingly insensitive to such stimulation. These behaviors are strongly influenced by genetic factors, but prenatal and post- natal environmental factors also play a role in their development (Goldsmith, 2003; Rothbart et al., 2000). Our early temperament is thought to be the basis from which our personality develops. Starting at about 2 to 3 months of age, approximately five dimensions of temperament can be identified: fearfulness, irritability and frustration, positive affect, activity level, and attentional persistence and effortful control, although some of these emerge later than others. These seem to be related to the three important dimensions of adult personal- ity: (1) neuroticism or negative emotionality, (2) extraversion or positive emotionality, and (3) constraint (conscientiousness and agreeableness; Rothbart & Ahadi, 1994; Rothbart & Bates, 2006; Watson, Clark, & Harkness, 1994). The infant dimen- sions of fearfulness and irritability, which show few gender differences (Else-Quest et al., 2006), correspond to the adult
dimension of neuroticism—the disposition to experience nega- tive affect. The infant dimensions of positive affect and possibly activity level seem related to the adult dimension of extraversion, and the infant dimension of attentional persistence and effortful control seem related to the adult dimension of constraint or con- trol. One quantitative review concluded that, on average, boys show slightly higher levels of activity and intense pleasure than do girls, whereas girls, on average, seem to have greater control of their impulses and greater ability to regulate their attention (e.g., Else-Quest et al., 2006). At least some aspects of tempera- ment show a moderate degree of stability from late in the first year of life through at least middle childhood, although tempera- ment can also change (e.g., Fox et al., 2005; Kagan, 2003; Rothbart et al., 2000). Just as we saw in the discussion of genotype–environment correlations, the temperament of an infant or young child has profound effects on a variety of important developmental pro- cesses (Fox et al., 2010; Rothbart et al., 2000). For example, a child with a fearful temperament has many opportunities for the classical conditioning of fear to situations in which fear is pro- voked; later the child may learn to avoid entering those feared situations, and evidence suggests that he or she may be especially likely to learn to fear social situations (Fox et al., 2010; Kagan, 2003). In addition, children with high levels of positive affect and activity are more likely to show high levels of mastery motivation, whereas children with high levels of fear and sadness are less likely to show mastery motivation (Posner & Rothbart, 2007). Finally, children with high levels of negative emotionality are more difficult for parents to be supportive of, and different parents have different styles of parenting such children. This seems to be true especially in families with lower socioeconomic status, which are, on average, less supportive of difficult children than families of mid to high socioeconomic status. The latter families seem to be more resourceful in adapting their parenting styles when faced with such high negative emotionality in a child (Paulussen-Hoogeboom et al., 2007). Not surprisingly, temperament may also set the stage for the development of various forms of psychopathology later in life. For example, children who are fearful and hypervigilant in many novel or unfamiliar situations have been labeled   behavior- ally inhibited   by Kagan, Fox, and their colleagues. This trait has a significant heritable component (Kagan, 2003) and, when it is stable, is a risk factor for the development of anxiety disorders later in childhood and probably in adulthood (e.g., Fox et al., 2005, 2010; Kagan, 2003). Conversely, 2-year-old children who are highly   uninhibited , showing little fear of anything, may have difficulty learning moral standards for their behavior from parents or society (Frick, Cornell, Bodin, et al., 2003; Rothbart, Ahadi, & Evans, 2000), and they have been shown at age 13 to exhibit more aggressive and delinquent behavior (Schwartz, Snidman, & Kagan, 1996). If these personality ingredients are combined with high levels of hostility, the stage also might be set for the development of conduct disorder and antisocial personal- ity disorder (Harpur et al., 1993).  Brain Dysfunction and Neural Plasticity  As noted earlier, specific brain lesions with observable defects in brain tissue are rarely a primary cause of psychiatric disorders. However, advances in understanding how more subtle deficiencies of brain structure or function are implicated in many mental disorders have been increasing at a rapid pace in the past few decades. Some of these advances come from the increased availability of sophisticated new neuroimaging techniques to study the function and structure of the brain (see Chapter 4 for more details). These and other kinds of techniques have shown that genetic programs for brain development are not so rigid and deter- ministic as was once believed (e.g., Gottesman & Hanson, 2005; Nelson & Bloom, 1997; Thompson & Nelson, 2001). Instead, there is considerable   neural plasticity —flexibility of the brain in making changes in organization and function in response to pre- and postnatal experiences, stress, diet, disease, drugs, matura- tion, and so forth. Existing neural circuits can be modified, or new neural circuits can be generated (e.g., Fox et al., 2010; Kolb et al., 2003). The effects can be either beneficial or detrimental to the individual, depending on the circumstances. One example of the positive effects of   prenatal experiences  comes from an experiment in which pregnant rats housed in complex, enriched environments had offspring that were less negatively affected by brain injury that occurred early in development than those without the same positive prenatal experiences (Kolb et al., 2003). One example of negative effects of prenatal experiences comes from an experiment in which pregnant monkeys exposed to unpredictable loud sounds had infants that were jittery and showed neurochemical abnormali- ties (specifically, elevated levels of circulating catecholamines; Schneider, 1992). Many   postnatal environmental events   also affect the brain development of the infant and child (Nelson & Bloom, 1997; Thompson & Nelson, 2001). For example, the formation of new neural connections (or synapses) after birth is  A child with a fearful and anxious temperament can become very dis- tressed with changes in the environment, such as his mother leaving for work.
dramatically affected by the experiences a young organism has (e.g., Greenough & Black, 1992; Rosenzweig et al., 2002). Rats reared in enriched environments (as opposed to in isolation) show heavier and thicker cell development in certain portions of the cortex (as well as more synapses per neuron). Similar but less extensive changes can occur in older animals exposed to enriched environments; hence neural plasticity continues to some extent throughout the life span (see Fox et al., 2010; Lambert & Kinsley, 2005). The early implications of this kind of work were taken to suggest that human infants should be exposed to highly enriched environments. However, subsequent work has shown that normal rearing conditions with caring parents are perfectly adequate. What later work really showed is that unstimulat- ing, deprived environments can cause retarded development (Thompson, 2000; Thompson & Nelson, 2001). This research on neural and behavioral plasticity, in combination with the work described earlier on genotype– environment correlations, makes it clear why developmental psychopathologists have been devoting increasing attention to a   developmental systems approach   (e.g., Masten, 2006; Spencer et al., 2009). This approach acknowledges not only that genetic activity influences neural activity, which in turn influences behavior, which in turn influences the environ- ment, but also that these influences are bidirectional. Thus Figure 3.7 illustrates this first direction of influence but also shows how various aspects of our environment (physical, social, and cultural) also influence our behavior, which in turn affects our neural activity, and this in turn can even influence genetic activity (Gottlieb, 1992; Gottlieb & Halpern, 2002; see also Gottesman & Hanson, 2005; Masten, 2006).  The Impact of the Biological Viewpoint  Biological discoveries have profoundly affected the way we think about human behavior. We now recognize the important role of biochemical factors and innate characteristics, many of which are genetically determined, in both normal and abnor- mal behavior. In addition, since the 1950s we have witnessed many new developments in the use of drugs that can dramati- cally alter the severity and course of certain mental disorders— particularly the more severe ones such as schizophrenia and manic depressive illness (bipolar disorder). The host of new drugs has attracted a great deal of attention to the biological viewpoint not only in scientific circles but also in the popular media. Biological treatments seem to have more immediate results than other available therapies, and the hope is that they may in most cases lead to a “cure-all”—immediate results with seemingly little effort. However, as Gorenstein (1992) and others argued two decades ago, there are several common errors in the way many people interpret the meaning of recent biological advances. Gorenstein points out that it is illusory to think—as some prominent biological researchers have—that establishing biological differences between, for example, individuals with schizophrenia and those without schizophrenia in and of itself substantiates that schizophrenia is an illness (e.g., Andreasen, 1984; Kety, 1974). All behavioral traits (introversion and extraversion, for example, or high and low sensation seek- ing) are characterized by distinctive biological characteristics, yet we do not label these traits as illnesses. Thus the decision about what constitutes a mental illness or disorder ultimately still rests on clinical judgment regarding the functional effects of the disordered behavior—specifically whether it leads to clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning. Establishing the biological substrate does not bear on this issue because all behavior—normal and abnormal—has a biological substrate. As Gorenstein (1992) also pointed out, the effects of psy- chological events are always   mediated   through the activities of the central nervous system because all our behaviors, beliefs, emotions, and cognitions are ultimately reducible to a set of biological events in the brain. In actuality, then, if we find some dysfunction of the nervous system, this dysfunction could have arisen from psychological causes as well as from biological causes. In addition, psychological treatments are often as effective as drugs in producing changes in brain structure and function (e.g., Baxter et al., 2000; Linden, 2006).  Environment (physical, social, cultural) Behavior Neural activity Genetic activity Individual development  Bidirectional Influences  figure   3.7  Bidirectional Influences.   A systems view of psychobiological development.  Source:   From Gilbert Gottlieb. 1992.   Individual Development and Evolution: The Genesis of Novel Behavior . New York: Oxford University Press. Reprinted by permission of Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  research close-up  Mediate  A mediator (or mediating variable) lies between two other variables and helps explain the relationship between them. You can think of it as being like an intermediate variable, hence the name.
At a more general level, we must remind ourselves again that few, if any, mental disorders are independent of people’s person- alities or of the problems they face in trying to live their lives. We will examine viewpoints that emphasize these psychological and sociocultural considerations in the pages that follow, keep- ing in mind that the ultimate challenge will be to integrate these varying perspectives into a theoretically consistent biopsychoso- cial perspective on psychopathology.  in review  •   Describe the sequence of events involved in the transmission of nerve impulses.  •   Explain how neurotransmitter and hormonal abnormalities might produce abnormal behavior.  •   What is the relationship between an individual’s genotype and phenotype, and how can genotypes shape and interact with the environment?  •   Describe at least two methods for studying genetic influences on abnormal behavior.  •   What is temperament, and why is it important for the origins of abnormal behavior?  •   What do we mean by “neural plasticity”?  The Psychological Viewpoints  There are many more psychological than biological interpreta- tions of abnormal behavior, reflecting a wider range of opinions on how best to understand humans as people with motives, desires, perceptions, thoughts, and so on rather than just as bio- logical organisms. We will examine in some depth three perspec- tives on human nature and behavior that have been particularly influential: psychodynamic, behavioral, and cognitive-behavioral. (See Figure 3.8.) These three viewpoints represent distinct and sometimes conflicting orientations, but they are in many ways complementary. They all emphasize the importance of early experience and an awareness of psychological processes within an individual, as well as how these are influenced by social factors. The Developments in Thinking Box on page 77 will later pres- ent a few of the major themes of two additional psychological perspectives: the humanistic and existential perspectives.  The Psychodynamic Perspectives  As we noted in Chapter 2, Sigmund Freud founded the   psy- choanalytic school , which emphasized the role of unconscious motives and thoughts and their dynamic interrelationships in the determination of both normal and abnormal behavior. A key concept here is the   unconscious.   According to Freud, the con- scious part of the mind represents a relatively small area, whereas the unconscious part, like the submerged part of an iceberg, is the much larger portion. In the depths of the unconscious are the hurtful memories, forbidden desires, and other experiences that have been repressed—that is, pushed out of consciousness. However, Freud believed that unconscious material continues to seek expression and emerges in fantasies, dreams, slips of the tongue, and so forth. Until such unconscious material is brought to awareness and integrated into the conscious part of the mind—for example, through psychoanalysis (a form of psy- chotherapy Freud developed—see  6)—it may lead to irrational and maladaptive behavior. For our purposes, a general overview of the principles of classical psychoanalytic theory will suffice (see Alexander, 1948; Arlow, 2000; Luborsky & Barrett, 2006; or any of Freud’s original works for more information). We will then discuss several of the newer   psychodynamic perspec- tives , which were the second generation of theories that stemmed in some important ways out of Freud’s original psychoanalytic theory and yet also departed from it in significant ways.  FuNDAMeNTAlS oF FreuD’S PSyCHoANAlyTIC THeory The Structure of Personality: Id, ego, and Superego  Freud theorized that a person’s behavior results from the interac- tion of three key components of the personality or psyche: the id, ego, and superego (e.g., see Arlow, 2000; Engler, 2006). The   id   is the source of instinctual drives and is the first structure to appear in infancy. These drives are inherited and are considered to be of two opposing types: (1)   life instincts , which are constructive drives primarily of a sexual nature and which constitute the   libido , the basic emotional and psychic energy of life; and (2)   death instincts , which are destructive drives that tend toward aggression, destruc- tion, and eventual death. Freud used the term   sexual   in a broad sense to refer to almost anything pleasurable, from eating to paint- ing. The id operates on the   pleasure principle , engaging in com- pletely selfish and pleasure-oriented behavior, concerned only with the immediate gratification of instinctual needs without reference to reality or moral considerations. Although the id can generate mental images and wish-fulfilling fantasies, referred to as   primary  •   Psychosocial perspectives attempt to understand humans not just as biological organisms but also as people with motives, desires, and perceptions.  •   ere are three major psychosocial perspectives on human nature and behavior:  1.   Psychodynamic  2.   Behavioral  3.   Cognitive-behavioral  •   Also includes two other perspectives:  1.   e humanistic perspective  2.   e existential perspective  figure   3.8  Psychosocial Perspectives.
process thinking , it cannot undertake the realistic actions needed to meet instinctual demands. Consequently, after the first few months of life, a second part of the personality, as viewed by Freud, develops—the   ego . The ego mediates between the demands of the id and the realities of the external world. For example, during toilet training the child learns to control a bodily function to meet parental and societal expectations, and it is the developing ego that assumes the role of mediating between the physical needs of the body/id and the need to find an appropriate place and time. One of the basic functions of the ego is to meet id demands, but in such a way as to ensure the well-being and survival of the individual. This role requires the use of reason and other intellectual resources in dealing with the external world, as well as the exercise of control over id demands. The ego’s adaptive measures are referred to as   secondary process thinking , and the ego operates on the   reality principle . Freud viewed id demands, especially sexual and aggressive strivings, as inherently in conflict with the rules and prohibi- tions imposed by society. He postulated that as a child grows and gradually learns the rules of parents and society regarding right and wrong, a third part of the personality gradually emerges from the ego—the   superego . The superego is the outgrowth of inter- nalizing the taboos and moral values of society concerning what is right and wrong. It is essentially what we refer to as the   conscience . As the superego develops, it becomes an inner control system that deals with the uninhibited desires of the id. Because the ego medi- ates among the desires of the id, the demands of reality, and the moral constraints of the superego, it is often called the   executive branch of the personality . Freud believed that the interplay of id, ego, and superego is of crucial significance in determining behavior. Often inner mental conflicts arise because the three subsystems are striving for different goals. If unresolved, these   intrapsychic conflicts  lead to mental disorder.  Anxiety, Defense Mechanisms, and the unconscious  The concept of   anxiety —generalized feelings of fear and apprehension—is prominent in the psychoanalytic view- point because it is an almost universal symptom of neurotic disorders. Indeed, Freud believed that anxiety plays a key causal role in most of the forms of psychopathology that will be discussed in this book. He believed that the anxiety is sometimes overtly experienced, and at other times it is repressed and then transformed into and manifested in other overt symptoms such as conversion blindness or paralysis (see Chapter 8). Anxiety is a warning of impending real or imagined dan- gers as well as a painful experience, and it forces an individual to take corrective action. Often, the ego can cope with objective anxiety through rational measures. However, neurotic and moral anxiety, because they are unconscious, usually cannot be dealt with through rational measures. In these cases the ego resorts to irrational protective measures that are referred to as   ego-defense mechanisms , some of which are described in Table 3.1 on page 72. These defense mechanisms discharge or soothe anxiety, but they do so by helping a person push painful ideas out of con- sciousness (such as when we “forget” a dental appointment) rather than by dealing directly with the problem. These mechanisms result in a distorted view of reality, although some are clearly more adaptive than others.  Psychosexual Stages of Development   In addition to his concept of the structure of personality, Freud also conceptual- ized five   psychosexual stages of development   that we all pass through from infancy through puberty. Each stage is characterized by a dominant mode of achieving libidinal (sexual) pleasure: 1.   Oral stage:   During the first 2 years of life, the mouth is the principal erogenous zone: An infant’s greatest source of grat- ification is sucking, a process that is necessary for feeding. 2.   Anal stage:   From ages 2 to 3, the anus provides the major source of pleasurable stimulation during the time when toilet training is often going on and there are urges both for retention and for elimination. 3.   Phallic stage:   From ages 3 to 5 or 6, self-manipulation of the genitals provides the major source of pleasurable sensation. 4.   Latency period:   From ages 6 to 12, sexual motivations recede in importance as a child becomes preoccupied with developing skills and other activities. 5.   Genital stage:   After puberty, the deepest feelings of plea- sure come from sexual relations.  Anxiety is almost universally experienced at some point. This woman shows her anxiety while awaiting news about the outcome of surgery on her sick child.
Freud believed that appropriate gratification during each stage is important if a person is to avoid being stuck, or   fixated , at that level. For example, he maintained that an infant who does not receive adequate oral gratification may, in adult life, be prone to excessive eating or other forms of oral stimulation, such as biting fingernails, smoking, or drinking.  The oedipus Complex and the electra Complex   In general, each psychosexual stage of development places demands on a child and arouses conflicts that Freud believed must be resolved in order to avoid later fixations. One of the most impor- tant conflicts occurs during the phallic stage, when the pleasures of self-stimulation and accompanying fantasies pave the way for the   Oedipus complex . According to Greek mythology, Oedipus unknowingly killed his father and married his mother. Each young boy, Freud thought, symbolically relives the Oedipus drama. He longs for his mother sexually and views his father as a hated rival; however, each young boy also fears that his father will punish his son’s lust by cutting off his penis. This   castration anxiety   forces the boy to repress his sexual desire for his mother and his hostility toward his father. Eventually, if all goes well, the boy identifies with his father and comes to have only harmless affection for his mother, channeling his sexual impulses toward another woman. The   Electra complex   is the female counterpart of the Oedipus complex and is also drawn from a Greek tragedy. It is based on the view that each girl desires to possess her father and  The demands of the id are evident in early childhood. According to Freud, babies pass through an oral stage, in which sucking is a dominant pleasure.  table   3.1  ego-Defense Mechanisms Mechanism   example Displacement.   Discharging pent-up feelings, often of hostility, on objects less dangerous than those arousing the feelings. A woman harassed by her boss at work initiates an argument with her husband.  Fixation.   Attaching oneself in an unreasonable or exaggerated way to some person, or arresting emotional development on a childhood or adolescent level. An unmarried, middle-aged man still depends on his mother to provide his basic needs.  Projection.   Attributing one’s unacceptable motives or characteristics to others. An expansionist-minded dictator of a totalitarian state is convinced that neighboring countries are planning to invade.  rationalization.   Using contrived explanations to conceal or disguise unworthy motives for one’s behavior. A fanatical racist uses ambiguous passages from the scriptures to justify his hostile actions toward minorities.  reaction formation.   Preventing the awareness or expression of unacceptable desires by an exaggerated adoption of seemingly opposite behavior. A man troubled by homosexual urges initiates a zealous community campaign to stamp out gay bars.  regression.   Retreating to an earlier developmental level involving less mature behavior and responsibility. A man with shattered self-esteem reverts to childlike “showing off” and exhibits his genitals to young girls.  repression.   Preventing painful or dangerous thoughts from entering consciousness. A mother’s occasional murderous impulses toward her hyperactive 2-year-old are denied access to awareness.  Sublimation.   Channeling frustrated sexual energy into substitutive activities. A sexually frustrated artist paints wildly erotic pictures. Source: Based on A. Freud (1946) and   DSM-IV-TR   (2000).
to replace her mother. Freud also believed that each girl at this stage experiences   penis envy , wishing she could be more like her father and brothers. She emerges from the complex when she comes to identify with her mother and settles for a promissory note: One day she will have a man of her own who can give her a baby—which unconsciously serves as a type of penis substitute. Resolution of this conflict is considered essential if a young adult of either sex is to develop satisfactory heterosexual rela- tionships. The psychoanalytic perspective holds that the best we can hope for is to effect a compromise among our warring inclinations—and to realize as much instinctual gratification as possible with minimal punishment and guilt. This perspec- tive thus presents a deterministic view of human behavior that minimizes rationality and freedom of self-determination. On a group level, it interprets violence, war, and related phenomena as the inevitable products of the aggressive and destructive instincts present in human nature.  Newer PSyCHoDyNAMIC PerSPeCTIVeS   In seeking to un- derstand his patients and develop his theories, Freud was chiefly concerned with the workings of the id, its nature as a source of energy, and the manner in which this id energy could be chan- neled or transformed. He also focused on the superego and the role of conscience but paid relatively little attention to the im- portance of the ego. Later theorists developed some of Freud’s basic ideas in three somewhat different directions.  ego Psychology   One new direction was that taken by his daughter Anna Freud (1895–1982), who was much more concerned with how the   ego   performs its central functions as the “executive” of personality. She and some of the other influential second-generation psychodynamic theorists refined and elabo- rated on the ego-defense mechanisms and put the ego in the foreground, giving it an important organizing role in personal- ity development (e.g., A. Freud, 1946). According to this view, psychopathology develops when the ego does not function ade- quately to control or delay impulse gratification or does not make adequate use of defense mechanisms when faced with internal conflicts. This school became known as   ego psychology .  object-relations Theory   A second new psychodynamic perspective was object-relations theory, developed by a num- ber of prominent theorists including Melanie Klein, Margaret Mahler, W. R. D. Fairburn, and D. W. Winnicott, starting in the 1930s and 1940s. Although there are many variations on   object-relations theory , they share a focus on individuals’ interactions with real and imagined other people (external and internal objects) and on the relationships that people experi- ence between their external and internal objects (Engler, 2006; Greenberg & Mitchell, 1983).   Object   in this context refers to the symbolic representation of another person in the infant’s or child’s environment, most often a parent. Through a process of   introjection , a child symbolically incorporates into his or her personality (through images and memories) important people in his or her life. For example, a child might internalize images of a punishing father; that image then becomes a harsh self-critic, influencing how the child behaves. The general notion is that internalized objects could have various conflicting properties— such as exciting or attractive versus hostile, frustrating, or rejecting—and also that these objects could split off from the central ego and maintain independent existences, thus giving rise to inner conflicts. An individual experiencing such splitting among internalized objects is, so to speak, “the servant of many masters” and cannot therefore lead an integrated, orderly life. Otto Kernberg, for example, is an influential American analyst who has a theory that people with a   borderline personality , whose chief characteristic is instability (especially in personal relation- ships), are individuals who are unable to achieve a full and stable personal identity (self) because of an inability to integrate and reconcile pathological internalized objects (Kernberg 1985, 1996; Kernberg & Caligor, 2005; Kernberg & Michels, 2009). Because of their inability to structure their internal world in such a way that the people they know (including themselves) can have a mixture of both good and bad traits, they also perceive the external world in abrupt extremes. For example, a person may be “all good” one moment and “all bad” the next (Koenigsberg et al., 2000).  The Interpersonal Perspective   A third set of second- generation psychodynamic theorists focused on social determi- nants of behavior. We are social beings, and much of what we  Anna Freud (1895–1982) studied the important role of the ego in normal and abnormal development and elaborated the theory of ego-defense reactions.  Margaret Mahler (1897– 1985) elaborated the object-relations approach, which many see as the main focus of contempo- rary psychoanalysis.
are is a product of our relationships with others. It is logical to expect that much of psychopathology reflects this fact—that psychopathology is rooted in the unfortunate tendencies we have developed while dealing with our interpersonal environments. This is the focus of the   interpersonal perspective , which began with the defection in 1911 of Alfred Adler (1870–1937) from the psychoanalytic viewpoint of his teacher, Sigmund Freud, and emphasizes social and cultural forces rather than inner instincts as determinants of behavior. In Adler’s view, people are inher- ently social beings motivated primarily by the desire to belong to and participate in a group (see Engler, 2006; Mosak, 2000, for recent reviews). Over time, a number of other psychodynamic theorists also took issue with psychoanalytic theory for its neglect of crucial social factors. Among the best known of these theorists are Erich Fromm (1900–1980) and Karen Horney (1885–1952). Fromm focused on the orientations, or dispositions (exploitive, for example), that people adopted in their interactions with others. He believed that when these orientations to the social environment were maladap- tive, they served as the bases of much psychopathology. Horney independently developed a similar view and, in particular, vigor- ously rejected Freud’s demeaning psychoanalytic view of women (for instance, the idea that women experience penis envy). Erik Erikson (1902–1994) also extended the interpersonal aspects of psychoanalytic theory. He elaborated and broadened Freud’s psychosexual stages into more socially oriented concepts, describing crises or conflicts that occurred at eight stages, each of which could be resolved in a healthy or unhealthy way. For exam- ple, Erikson believed that during what Freud called the “oral stage,” when a child is preoccupied with oral gratification, a child’s real development centers on learning either “basic trust” or “basic mis- trust” of her or his social world. Achieving a certain level of trust, for instance, is necessary for later competence in many areas of life.  Attachment Theory   Finally, John Bowlby’s   attachment theory , which can in many ways be seen as having its roots in the interpersonal and object-relations perspectives, has become an enormously influential theory in child psychology and child psychiatry as well as in adult psychopathology. Drawing on Freud and others from these perspectives, Bowlby’s theory (1969, 1973, 1980) emphasizes the importance of early experi- ence, especially early experience with attachment relationships, as laying the foundation for later functioning throughout child- hood, adolescence, and adulthood. He stresses the importance of the quality of parental care to the development of secure attach- ments, but he also sees the infant as playing a more active role in shaping the course of his or her own development than had most of the earlier theorists (Carlson & Sroufe, 1995; Rutter et al., 2009; Sroufe et al., 2003).  IMPACT oF THe PSyCHoANAlyTIC PerSPeCTIVe   Freud’s psychoanalytic theory can be seen as the first systematic ap- proach to showing how human psychological processes can result in mental disorders. Much as the biological perspective had re- placed superstition with organic pathology as the suspected cause of mental disorders for many psychiatrists and psychologists, the psychoanalytic perspective replaced brain pathology with intra- psychic conflict and exaggerated ego defenses as the suspected cause of at least some mental disorders. Freud greatly advanced our understanding of both normal and abnormal behavior. Many of his original concepts have become fundamental to our thinking about human nature and behavior and have even had an important influence on the intel- lectual history of Western civilization. Two of Freud’s contribu- tions stand out as particularly noteworthy: 1. He developed therapeutic techniques such as free association and dream analysis for becoming acquainted with both the conscious and the unconscious aspects of mental life (see  6). The results obtained led Freud to emphasize several points that have been incorporated (in modified forms) into current thinking: (a) the extent to which uncon- scious motives and defense mechanisms affect behavior, meaning that the causes of human behavior are generally  Erich Fromm (1900–1980) focused on the orientations that people adopt in their interactions with others. He believed that these basic orientations to the social environment were the bases of much psychopathology.  Erik Erikson (1902–1994) elaborated and broadened Freud’s psychosexual stages into more socially oriented concepts. Erikson described conflicts that occurred at eight stages, each of which could be resolved in a healthy or unhealthy way.
not obvious or available to conscious awareness; (b) the importance of early childhood experiences in the develop- ment of both normal and abnormal personality; and (c) the importance of sexual factors in human behavior and mental disorders. Although, as we have said, Freud used the term  sexual   in a much broader sense than usual, the idea struck a common chord, and the role of sexual factors in human behavior was finally brought out into the open as an appro- priate topic for scientific investigation (see  2). 2. He demonstrated that certain abnormal mental phenomena occur in the attempt to cope with difficult problems and are simply exaggerations of normal ego-defense mechanisms. This realization that the same psychological principles apply to both normal and abnormal behavior dissipated much of the mystery and fear surrounding mental disorders. The psychoanalytic perspective came under attack, however, from many directions. Two important criticisms of traditional psychoanalytic theory center on its failure as a scientific theory to explain abnormal behavior. First, many believe that it fails to recognize sufficiently the scientific limits of personal reports of experience as the primary mode of obtaining information. Second, there is a lack of scientific evidence to support many of its explanatory assumptions or the effectiveness of traditional psychoanalysis (Erdelyi, 1992; but see also Westen, 1998). In addition, Freudian theory in particular has been criticized for an overemphasis on the sex drive, for its demeaning view of women, for pessimism about basic human nature, for exaggerat- ing the role of unconscious processes, and for failing to consider motives toward personal growth and fulfillment.  IMPACT oF Newer PSyCHoDyNAMIC PerSPeCTIVeS  The second generation of psychodynamic theorists has done much to improve scientific efforts to measure concepts such as a person’s core (but unconscious) conflictual relationships (e.g., Henry et al., 1994; Horowitz et al., 1991; Luborsky & Barrett, 2006). Some progress has also been made in understanding how psychodynamic therapy works and in documenting its effectiveness for certain problems (e.g., Crits-Christoph & Barber, 2000; Crits-Christoph et al., 2004; Shedler, 2010). In addition, Bowlby’s attachment theory has generated an enormous amount of research supporting many of its basic tenets about normal and abnormal child develop- ment and adult psychopathology (e.g., Carlson & Sroufe, 1995; Grossman et al., 2005; Rutter, 2006; Rutter et al., 2009). The interpersonal perspective has also done a good deal to establish its scientific validity. In the area of diagnosis, many sup- porters of the interpersonal perspective believe that the reliability and validity of psychological diagnoses could be improved if a new system based on interpersonal functioning were developed, and some progress has been made toward developing such a sys- tem (e.g., Benjamin, 1993, 2005; Benjamin et al., 2006). The focus of interpersonal therapy is on alleviating problem-causing relationships and on helping people achieve more satisfactory relationships. In recent years, major progress has been made in documenting that interpersonal psychotherapy for certain disor- ders such as depression, bulimia, and some personality disorders can be as effective, or nearly as effective, as cognitive-behavioral treatment—considered by many to be the treatment of choice for these disorders (Benjamin, 2004; Benjamin & Pugh, 2001; Hollon et al., 2002; Wilson & Fairburn, 2007). The Developments in Thinking box on page 77 presents two further psychological perspectives that developed in the middle of the twentieth century in part because their founders did not believe that psychodynamic theories acknowledged a person’s freedom of choice or the concept of free will.  The Behavioral Perspective  The behavioral perspective arose in the early twentieth century in part as a reaction against the unscientific methods of psycho- analysis. Behavioral psychologists believed that the study of sub- jective experience (e.g., free association and dream analysis) did not provide acceptable scientific data because such observations were not open to verification by other investigators. In their view, only the study of directly observable behavior and of the stimuli and reinforcing conditions that control it could serve as a basis for understanding human behavior, normal and abnormal. Although this perspective was initially developed through laboratory research rather than clinical practice with disturbed patients, its implications for explaining and treating maladaptive behavior soon became evident. As we noted in Chapter 2, the roots of the behavioral perspective are in Pavlov’s study of classi- cal conditioning and in Thorndike’s study of instrumental con- ditioning (later renamed operant conditioning by Skinner; today both terms are used). In the United States, where the behavioral perspective flourished, Watson did much to promote the behav- ioral approach to psychology with his book   Behaviorism   (1924).  Learning —the modification of behavior as a consequence of experience—is the central theme of the behavioral approach. Because most human behavior is learned, the behaviorists addressed the question of how learning occurs. Behaviorists focus on the effects of environmental conditions (stimuli) on the acquisition, modification, and possible elimination of various types of response patterns, both adaptive and maladaptive.  ClASSICAl CoNDITIoNING   A specific stimulus may come to elicit a specific response through the process of   classical condi- tioning . For example, although food naturally elicits salivation, a stimulus that reliably precedes and signals the presentation of food will also come to elicit salivation (Pavlov, 1927). In this case, food is the   unconditioned stimulus   (UCS) and salivation the   unconditioned response   (UCR). A stimulus that signals food delivery and eventually elicits salivation is called a   conditioned stimulus   (CS). Conditioning has occurred when presentation of the conditioned stimulus alone elicits salivation—the   conditioned response   (CR). The same general process occurs when a neutral
CS is paired with a painful or frightening stimulus such as a mild electric shock or loud noise, as illustrated in Figure 3.9, although in this case fear rather than salivation is conditioned. The hallmark of classical conditioning is that a formerly neutral stimulus—the CS—acquires the capacity to elicit biolog- ically adaptive responses through repeated pairings with the UCS (e.g., Bouton, 2007; Domjan, 2009). However, we also now know that this process of classical conditioning is not as blind or automatic as was once thought. Rather, it seems that animals (and people) actively acquire information about what CSs allow them to predict, expect, or prepare for an upcoming biologi- cally significant event (the UCS). That is, they learn what is often called a   stimulus-stimulus expectancy . Indeed, only CSs that provide reliable and nonredundant information about the occur- rence of a UCS acquire the capacity to elicit CRs (Hall, 1994; Rescorla, 1988). For example, if UCSs occur as often without being preceded by a CS as they do with the CS, conditioning will not occur because the CS in this case does not provide reli- able information about the occurrence of the UCS. Classically conditioned responses are well maintained over time; that is, they are not simply forgotten (even over many years). However, if a CS is repeatedly presented without the UCS, the conditioned response gradually extinguishes. This gradual process, known as   extinction , should not be confused with the idea of unlearning because we know that the response may return at some future point in time (a phenomenon Pavlov called   spontaneous recovery ). Moreover, a somewhat weaker CR may also still be elicited in different environmental contexts than in the one where the extinction process took place (Bouton, 1994, 2002; Bouton et al., 2006). Thus any extinction of fear that has taken place in a therapist’s office may not neces- sarily generalize completely and automatically to other contexts outside the therapist’s office (see Craske & Mystkowski, 2006; Mystkowski & Mineka, 2007). As we shall see later, these prin- ciples of extinction and spontaneous recovery have important implications for many forms of behavioral treatment. Classical conditioning is important in abnormal psychol- ogy because many physiological and emotional responses can be conditioned, including those related to fear, anxiety, or sexual arousal and those stimulated by drugs of abuse. Thus, for example, one can learn a fear of the dark if fear-producing stimuli (such as frightening dreams or fantasies) occur regularly in the dark, or one can acquire a fear of snakes if bitten by a snake (e.g., Mineka & Sutton, 2006; Mineka & Zinbarg, 2006). In addition, a young man who has his first few powerful sexual experiences (UCR) with a very attractive woman (UCS) wear- ing some form of distinctive clothing (CS—such as black fishnet stockings) may find in the future that he becomes very sexually aroused (CR) simply upon seeing fishnet stockings.  INSTruMeNTAl CoNDITIoNING   In   instrumental   (or  operant )   conditioning , an individual learns how to achieve a desired goal. The goal in question may be to obtain something that is rewarding or to escape from something that is unpleas- ant. Essential here is the concept of   reinforcement , which refers either to the delivery of a reward or pleasant stimulus, or to the removal of or escape from an aversive stimulus. New responses are learned and tend to recur if they are reinforced. Although it was originally thought that instrumental conditioning con- sisted of simple strengthening of a stimulus–response connec- tion every time that reinforcement occurred, it is now believed that the animal or person learns a   response – outcome expectancy  (e.g., Domjan, 2005)—that is, learns that a response will lead to a reward outcome. If sufficiently motivated for that outcome  Orientation response to light Unconditioned response (UCR) (Pain and fear) Conditioned response (fear) (CR) Conditioned response (fear) (CR)  Classical Conditioning Prior to conditioning:  Conditioned stimulus (neutral) (CS) (light) Unconditioned stimulus (UCS) (Painful stimulus)  During conditioning:  Conditioned stimulus (light) (CS) + Unconditioned stimulus (UCS) (Painful stimulus)  Following conditioning:  Conditioned stimulus (alone) (CS)  figure   3.9  Classical Conditioning.   Before conditioning, the CS is neutral and has no capacity to elicit fear. However, after being repeatedly followed by a painful or frightening UCS that elicits pain, fear, or distress, the CS gradually acquires the capacity to elicit a fear CR. If there are also interspersed trials in which the UCS occurs without being preceded by the CS, conditioning does not occur because in this case the CS is not a reliable predictor of the occurrence of the UCS.
(e.g., being hungry), the person will make the response that he or she has learned produces the outcome (e.g., opening the refrigerator). Initially a high rate of reinforcement may be necessary to establish an instrumental response, but lesser rates are usually suf- ficient to maintain it. In fact, an instrumental response appears to be especially persistent when reinforcement is intermittent—when the reinforcing stimulus does not invariably follow the response— as demonstrated in gambling, when occasional wins seem to maintain high rates of responding. However, when reinforcement is consistently withheld over time, the conditioned response— whether classical or instrumental—gradually extinguishes. In short, the subject eventually stops making the response. A special problem arises conditioning a response in situa- tions in which a subject has been conditioned to anticipate an aversive event and to make an instrumental response to avoid it. For example, a boy who has nearly drowned in a swimming pool may develop a fear of water and a   conditioned avoidance  developments in Thinking  The Humanistic and Existential Perspectives  THe HuMANISTIC PerSPeCTIVe  The   humanistic perspective   views human nature as basically “good.” Paying less attention to unconscious processes and past causes, it emphasizes present conscious processes and places strong emphasis on people’s inherent capacity for responsible self-direction. Humanistic psychologists think that much of the empirical research designed to investigate causal factors is too simplistic to uncover the complexities of human behavior. Instead, this perspective is concerned with processes such as love, hope, creativity, values, meaning, personal growth, and self-fulfillment. Although these abstract processes are not readily subject to empirical investigation, certain underlying themes and principles of humanistic psychology can be identified, including the self as a unifying theme and a focus on values and personal growth. In using the concept of   self   as a unifying theme, humanistic psy- chologists emphasize the importance of individuality. Among humanistic psychologists, Carl Rogers (1902–1987) developed the most systematic formulation of the   self-concept , based largely on his pioneering research into the nature of the psy- chotherapeutic process. Rogers (1951, 1959) stated his views in a series of propositions that may be summarized as follows:  • Each individual exists in a private world of experience of  which the   I, me , or   myself   is the center.  • The most basic striving of an individual is toward the main - tenance, enhancement, and actualization of the self, and his or her inner tendencies are toward health and whole- ness under normal conditions.  • Perceived threat to the self is followed by a defense, in - cluding a tightening of perception and behavior and the introduction of self-defense mechanisms. Humanistic psychologists emphasize that values and the process of choice are key in guiding our behavior and achieving meaningful and fulfilling lives. Each of us must develop values and a sense of our own identity based on our own experiences rather than blindly accepting the values of others; otherwise, we deny our own experiences and lose touch with our own feel- ings. Only in this way can we become   self-actualizing , meaning that we are achieving our full potential. According to this view, psychopathology is essentially the blocking or distortion of personal growth and the natural tendency toward physical and mental health.  6 presents the humanistic approach to psychotherapy.  THe exISTeNTIAl PerSPeCTIVe  The   existential perspective   resembles the humanistic view in its emphasis on the uniqueness of each individual, the quest for values and meaning, and the existence of freedom for self-direction and self-fulfillment. However, it takes a less optimistic view of human beings and places more emphasis on their irrational tendencies and the difficulties inherent in self-fulfillment—particularly in a modern, bureaucratic, and dehumanizing mass society. In short, living is much more of a “confrontation” for the existentialists than for the humanists. Existential thinkers are especially concerned with the inner ex- periences of an individual in his or her attempts to understand and deal with the deepest human problems. There are several basic themes of existentialism:  •   Existence and essence.   Our existence is a given, but what we make of it—our essence—is up to us. Our essence is created by our choices because our choices reflect the val- ues on which we base and order our lives.  •   Meaning and value.   The will-to-meaning is a basic human tendency to find satisfying values and guide one’s life by them.  •   Existential anxiety and the encounter with nothingness.  Nonbeing, or nothingness, which in its final form is death, is the inescapable fate of all human beings. The aware- ness of our inevitable death and its implications for our living can lead to existential anxiety, a deep concern over whether we are living meaningful and fulfilling lives. Thus existential psychologists focus on the importance of establishing values and acquiring a level of spiritual maturity worthy of the freedom and dignity bestowed by one’s human- ness. Avoiding such central issues creates corrupted, meaning- less, and wasted lives. Much abnormal behavior, therefore, is seen as the product of a failure to deal constructively with exis- tential despair and frustration.
response   in which he consistently avoids all large bodies of water. According to one influential theory, when he sees a pond, lake, or swimming pool, he feels anxious; running away and avoiding contact lessens his anxiety and thus is reinforcing. As a result, his avoidance response is highly resistant to extinction. It also pre- vents him from having experiences with water that could bring about extinction of his fear. In later discussions, we will see that conditioned avoidance responses play a role in many patterns of abnormal behavior. As we grow up, instrumental learning becomes an important mechanism for discriminating between what will prove reward- ing and what will prove unrewarding—and thus for acquiring the behaviors essential for coping with our world. Unfortunately, what we learn is not always useful in the long run. We may learn to value things (such as cigarettes or alcohol) that seem attractive in the short run but that can actually hurt us in the long run, or we may learn coping patterns (such as helplessness, bullying, or other irresponsible behaviors) that are maladaptive rather than adaptive in the long run.  GeNerAlIzATIoN AND DISCrIMINATIoN   In both clas- sical and instrumental conditioning, when a response is con- ditioned to one stimulus or set of stimuli, it can be evoked by other, similar stimuli; this process is called   generalization . A person who fears bees, for example, may generalize that fear to all flying insects. A process complementary to generalization is   discrimination , which occurs when a person learns to dis- tinguish between similar stimuli and to respond differently to them based on which ones are followed by reinforcement. For example, because red strawberries taste good and green ones do not, a conditioned discrimination will occur if a person has experience with both. The concepts of generalization and discrimination have many implications for the development of maladaptive behavior. Although generalization enables us to use past experiences in siz- ing up new situations, the possibility of making inappropriate generalizations always exists, as when a troubled adolescent fails to discriminate between friendly and hostile teasing from peers. In some instances, an important discrimination seems to be beyond an individual’s capability (as when a bigoted person deals with others on the basis of stereotypes rather than as individuals) and may lead to inappropriate and maladaptive behavior.  oBSerVATIoNAl leArNING   Human and nonhuman primates are also capable of   observational learning —that is, learning through observation alone, without directly experienc- ing an unconditioned stimulus (for classical conditioning) or a reinforcement (for instrumental conditioning). For instance, children can acquire new fears simply observing a parent or peer behaving fearfully with some object or situation that the child did not initially fear. In this case, they experience the fear of the parent or peer vicariously, and that fear becomes attached to the formerly neutral object (Mineka & Oehlberg, 2008; Mineka & Cook, 1993; Mineka & Sutton, 2006). For observational instru- mental learning, Bandura did a classic series of experiments in the 1960s on how children observationally learned various novel, aggressive responses toward a large Bobo doll after they had ob- served models being reinforced for these responses (see Bandura, 1969). Although the children themselves were never directly reinforced for showing these novel aggressive responses, they nonetheless showed them when given the opportunity to interact with the Bobo doll themselves. The possibilities for observational conditioning of both classical and instrumental responses greatly expand our opportunities for learning both adaptive and mal- adaptive behavior.  IMPACT oF THe BeHAVIorAl PerSPeCTIVe   Because there was so much resistance from well-entrenched supporters of psy- choanalysis, behavior therapy did not become well established as a powerful way of viewing and treating abnormal behavior until the 1960s and 1970s. By then, the behavioral assault on the prevailing psychodynamic doctrine of the time (Salter, 1949; Wolpe, 1958) was well underway and important evidence had been gathered on the power of behavior therapy techniques. By means of relatively few basic concepts, the behavioral perspective attempts to explain the acquisition, modification, and extinction of nearly all types of behavior. Maladaptive behavior is viewed as essentially the result of (1) a failure to learn necessary adaptive behaviors or competencies, such as how to establish satisfying personal relationships, and/or (2) the learning of ineffective or maladaptive responses. Maladaptive behavior is thus the result of learning that has gone awry and is defined in terms of specific, observable, undesirable responses. For the behavior therapist, the focus of therapy is on chang- ing specific behaviors and emotional responses—eliminating undesirable reactions and learning desirable ones. For example, fears and phobias can be successfully treated by prolonged expo- sure to the feared objects or situations—an extinction procedure  Continuing to gamble after an occasional unpredictable win is an example of intermittent reinforcement. Behavior that is reinforced in this unpredictable manner occurs at high rates and is highly resistant to extinction.
derived from principles of extinction of classical conditioning. Or an inappropriate sexual attraction to a deviant stimulus (such as prepubertal children) can be altered by pairing pictures of the deviant stimuli with a foul odor or another unpleasant stimulus. Classic work using the principles of instrumental conditioning also showed that chronically mentally ill people in institutions can be retaught basic living skills such as clothing and feeding themselves through the use of tokens that are earned for appro- priate behavior and that can be turned in for desirable rewards (candy, time watching television, passes to go outside, etc.). The behavioral approach is well known for its precision and objectivity, for its wealth of research, and for its demonstrated effectiveness in changing specific behaviors. A behavior thera- pist specifies what behavior is to be changed and how it is to be changed. Later, the effectiveness of the therapy can be evaluated objectively by the degree to which the stated goals have been achieved. Nevertheless, the behavioral perspective has been criti- cized for several reasons. One early criticism was that behavior therapy was concerned only with symptoms, not underlying causes. However, this criticism has been considered unfair by many contemporary behavior therapists, given that success- ful symptom-focused treatment often has very positive effects on other aspects of a person’s life (e.g., Borkovec et al., 1995; Lenz & Demal, 2000). Still others have argued that the behav- ioral approach oversimplifies human behavior and is unable to explain all of its complexities. This latter criticism stems at least in part from misunderstandings about current developments in behavioral approaches (e.g., Bouton, 2007; Bouton et al., 2001; Mineka & Oehlberg, 2008; Mineka & Zinbarg, 2006). What- ever its limitations, the behavioral perspective has had a tremen- dous impact on contemporary views of human nature, behavior, and psychopathology.  The Cognitive-Behavioral Perspective  Since the 1950s many psychologists, including some learning theorists, have focused on cognitive processes and their impact on behavior. Cognitive psychology involves the study of basic information-processing mechanisms such as attention and mem- ory, as well as higher mental processes such as thinking, planning, and decision making. The current emphasis within psychology as a whole on understanding all of these facets of normal human cognition originally began as a reaction against the relatively mechanistic nature of the traditional, radical behavioral viewpoint (espoused by Watson and Skinner), including its failure to attend to the importance of mental processes—both in their own right and for their influence on emotions and behavior. Albert Bandura (b. 1925), a learning theorist who developed an early cognitive-behavioral perspective, placed considerable emphasis on the cognitive aspects of learn- ing. Bandura stressed that human beings regulate behavior by internal symbolic processes—thoughts. That is, we learn by   internal reinforcement . According to Bandura, we prepare ourselves for difficult tasks, for example, by visualizing what the consequences would be if we did not perform them. Thus we take our automobiles to the garage in the fall and have the antifreeze checked because we can “see” ourselves stranded on a road in winter. We do not always require external reinforcement to alter our behavior patterns; our cognitive abilities allow us to solve many problems internally. Bandura (1974) went so far as to say that human beings have “a capacity for self-direction” (p. 861). Bandura later developed a theory of   self-efficacy , the belief that one can achieve desired goals (1986, 1997). He pos- ited that cognitive-behavioral treatments work in large part by improving self-efficacy. Other cognitive-behavioral theorists abandoned the learn- ing theory framework more vigorously than did Bandura and focused almost exclusively on cognitive processes and their impact on behavior. Today the cognitive or   cognitive- behavioral perspective   on abnormal behavior generally focuses on how thoughts and information processing can become dis- torted and lead to maladaptive emotions and behavior. One central construct for this perspective is the concept of a schema, which was adapted from cognitive psychology by Aaron Beck (b. 1921), another pioneering cognitive theorist (e.g., Beck, 1967; Neisser, 1967, 1982). A   schema   is an underlying rep- resentation of knowledge that guides the current processing of information and often leads to distortions in attention, memory, and comprehension. People develop different schemas based on their temperament, abilities, and experiences.  SCHeMAS AND CoGNITIVe DISTorTIoNS   Our schemas about the world around us and about ourselves (self-schemas) are our guides, one might say, through the complexities of liv- ing in the world as we understand it. For example, we all have schemas about other people (for example, expectations that they are lazy or very career oriented). We also have schemas about so- cial roles (for example, expectations about what the appropriate  Albert Bandura (b. 1925) stressed that people learn more by internal than external reinforcement. They can visualize the consequences of their actions rather than rely exclusively on environmental reinforcements.
behaviors for a widow are) and about events (for example, what sequences of events are appropriate for a particular situation such as someone coping with a loss; Bodenhausen & Morales, 2013; Clark, Beck, & Alford, 1999; Fiske & Taylor, 1991). Our   self-schemas   include our views on who we are, what we might become, and what is important to us. Other aspects of our self-schemas concern our notions of the various roles we occupy or might occupy in our social environment such as “woman,” “man,” “student,” “parent,” “physician,” “American,” and so on. Most people have clear ideas about at least some of their own personal attributes and less clear ideas about other attributes (Fiske & Taylor, 1991; Kunda, 1999). Schemas about the world and self-schemas are vital to our ability to engage in effective and organized behavior because they enable us to focus on the most relevant and important bits of information among the amazingly complex array of information that is available to our senses. However, schemas are also sources of psychological vulnerabilities because some of our schemas or certain aspects of our self-schemas may be distorted and inac- curate. In addition, we often hold some schemas—even distorted ones—with conviction, making them resistant to change. This is in part because we are usually not completely conscious of our schemas. In other words, although our daily decisions and behavior are largely shaped by these frames of reference, we may be unaware of the assumptions on which they are based—or even of making assumptions at all. We think that we are simply seeing things the way they are and often do not consider the fact that other views of the “real” world might be possible or that other rules for what is “right” might exist. We tend to work new experiences into our existing cognitive frameworks, even if the new information has to be reinterpreted or distorted to make it fit—a process known as   assimilation . In other words, we are likely to cling to existing assumptions and to reject or distort new information that contradicts them.  Accommodation —changing our existing frameworks to make it possible to incorporate new information that doesn’t fit—is more difficult and threatening, especially when important assumptions are challenged. Accommodation is, of course, a basic goal of psychological therapies—explicitly in the case of the cognitive and cognitive-behavioral therapies, but deeply embed- ded in virtually all other approaches as well. According to Beck (1967; Beck & Weishaar, 2000; Beck et al., 2004; Beck et al., 2005), different forms of psychopathol- ogy are characterized by different maladaptive schemas that have developed as a function of adverse early learning experiences. These maladaptive schemas lead to the distortions in think- ing that are characteristic of certain disorders such as anxiety, depression, and personality disorders. In addition to studying the nature of dysfunctional schemas associated with different forms of psychopathology, researchers have also studied several differ- ent patterns of distorted information processing exhibited by people with various forms of psychopathology. This research has illuminated the cognitive mechanisms that may be involved in causing or maintaining certain disorders. For example, depressed individuals show memory biases favoring negative information over positive or neutral information. Such biases are likely to help reinforce or maintain one’s current depressed state (e.g., Joormann, 2009; Mathews & MacLeod, 1994, 2005). Another important feature of information processing is that a great deal of information is processed   nonconsciously , or out- side of our awareness. Note that the term   nonconscious   does not refer to Freud’s concept of the   unconscious , in which primitive emotional conflicts are thought to simmer. Instead, the term  nonconscious mental activity   as studied by cognitive psychologists is simply a descriptive term for mental processes that are occur- ring without our being aware of them. One example relevant to  Our self-schemas—our frames of reference for what we are, what we might become, and what is important to us—influence our choice of goals and our confidence in attain- ing them. A probable element of this older woman’s self-schema was that she could accomplish her life- long goal of obtaining a college education once her children were grown in spite of the fact she was nearly 40 years older than the average college student.  Aaron Beck (b. 1921) pioneered the develop- ment of cognitive theories of depression, anxiety, and personality disor- ders. He also developed highly effective cognitive- behavioral treatments for these disorders.
psychopathology is that anxious people seem to have their atten- tion drawn to threatening information even when that infor- mation is presented subliminally (that is, without the person’s awareness; e.g., Mathews & MacLeod, 1994, 2005). Another rel- evant example occurs in the well-known phenomenon of   implicit memory , which is demonstrated when a person’s behavior reveals that she or he remembers a previously learned word or activ- ity even though she or he cannot consciously remember it. For example, if someone asks you for your old home phone number from about 10 years ago, you may not be able to recall it (no explicit memory for it), but if you picked up a phone you might dial it correctly (intact implicit memory for it).  ATTrIBuTIoNS, ATTrIBuTIoNAl STyle, AND PSyCHoPA- THoloGy   Attribution theory   has also contributed significantly to the cognitive-behavioral approach (Anderson, Krull, & Weiner, 1996; Fiske & Taylor, 1991; Gotlib & Abramson, 1999). An   attribution   is simply the process of assigning causes to things that happen. We may attribute behavior to external events such as rewards or punishments (“He did it for the money”), or we may assume that the causes are internal and derive from traits within ourselves or others (“He did it because he is so generous”). Causal attributions help us explain our own or other people’s behaviors and make it possible to predict what we or others are likely to do in the future. A student who fails a test may attribute the failure to a lack of intelligence (a personal trait) or to ambigu- ous test questions or unclear directions (environmental causes). Attribution theorists have been interested in whether dif- ferent forms of psychopathology are associated with distinctive and dysfunctional attributional styles.   Attributional style   is a characteristic way in which an individual tends to assign causes to bad events or good events. For example, depressed people tend to attribute bad events to internal, stable, and global causes (“I failed the test because I’m stupid” as opposed to “I failed the test because the teacher was in a bad mood and graded it unfairly”). However inaccurate our attributions may be, they become important parts of our view of the world and can have significant effects on our emotional well-being (Abramson et al., 1978; Buchanan & Seligman, 1995; Mineka et al., 2003). Interestingly, nondepressed people tend to have what is called a  self-serving bias   in which they are more likely to make internal, stable, and global attributions for positive rather than negative events (e.g., Mezulis et al., 2004).  CoGNITIVe THerAPy   Beck, who is generally considered the founder of cognitive therapy, has been enormously influential in the development of cognitive-behavioral treatment approaches to various forms of psychopathology. Following Beck’s lead, cognitive-behavioral theorists and clinicians have simply shifted their focus from overt behavior itself to the underlying cogni- tions assumed to be producing the maladaptive emotions and behavior. Fundamental to Beck’s perspective is the idea that the way we interpret events and experiences determines our emotional reactions to them. Suppose, for example, that you are sitting in your living room and hear a crash in the adjacent dining room. You remember that you left the window open in the dining room and conclude that a gust of wind must have knocked over your favorite vase, which was sitting on the table. What would your emotional reaction be? Probably you would be annoyed or angry with yourself either for having left the win- dow open or for having left the vase out (or both!). By contrast, suppose you conclude that a burglar must have climbed in the open window. What would your emotional reaction be then? In all likelihood, you would feel frightened. Thus your interpreta- tion of the crash you heard in the next room fundamentally determines your emotional reaction to it. Moreover, certain individuals with prominent danger schemas may be especially prone to making the burglar assumption in this example, leav- ing them at risk for anxiety and worry. One central issue for cognitive therapy, then, is how best to alter distorted and maladaptive cognitions, includ- ing the underlying maladaptive schemas that lead to differ- ent disorders and their associated emotions. For example, cognitive-behavioral clinicians are concerned with their cli- ents’ self-statements—that is, with what their clients say to themselves by way of interpreting their experiences. People who interpret what happens in their lives as a negative reflec- tion of their self-worth are likely to feel depressed; people who interpret the sensation that their heart is racing as meaning that they may have a heart attack and die are likely to have a panic attack. Cognitive-behavioral clinicians use a variety of techniques designed to alter whatever negative cognitive biases the client harbors (e.g., see Barlow, 2008; Beck et al., 2004; Hollon & Beck, 1994; Hollon et al., 2006). This is in contrast to, for example, psychodynamic practice, which assumes that diverse problems are due to a limited array of intrapsychic con- flicts (such as an unresolved Oedipus complex) and tends not to focus treatment directly on a person’s particular problems or complaints. Many widely used cognitive-behavioral therapies will be described in later chapters.  THe IMPACT oF THe CoGNITIVe-BeHAVIorAl PerSPeCTIVe  The cognitive-behavioral viewpoint has had a powerful impact on contemporary clinical psychology. Many researchers and clinicians have found support for the principle of altering hu- man behavior through changing the way people think about themselves and others. Many traditional behaviorists, however, have remained skeptical of the cognitive-behavioral viewpoint. B. F. Skinner (1990), in his last major address, remained true to behaviorism. He questioned the move away from principles of operant (instrumental) conditioning. He reminded his audience that cognitions are not observable phenomena and, as such, cannot be relied on as solid empirical data. Although Skinner
is gone, this debate will surely continue in some form. Indeed, Wolpe (1988, 1993), another founder of behavior therapy, also remained highly critical of the cognitive perspective until his death in 1997. However, these criticisms have seemed to be decreasing in recent years as more and more evidence ac- cumulates for the efficacy of cognitive-behavioral treatments for various disorders ranging from schizophrenia to anxiety, depression, and personality disorders (e.g., Barlow, 2008; Butler et al., 2006; Tolin, 2010). This approach has also been greatly advanced by the accumulation of sophisticated information- processing studies of the effects of emotion on cognition and behavior (e.g., Joormann, 2009; Mathews & MacLeod, 2005). This is because such studies do not rely on the self-report tech- niques that were originally central to this approach, and which are especially open to the kinds of criticisms raised by Skinner and Wolpe.  what the Adoption of a Perspective Does and Does Not Do  Each of the psychological perspectives on human behavior— psychodynamic, behavioral, and cognitive-behavioral— contributes to our understanding of psychopathology, but none alone can account for the complex variety of human maladap- tive behaviors. Because different causal perspectives influence which components of maladaptive behavior the observer focuses on, each perspective depends on generalizations from limited observations and research. For example, in attempting to explain a complex disorder such as alcohol dependence, the more tradi- tional psychodynamic viewpoint focuses on intrapsychic conflict and anxiety that the person attempts to reduce through the intake of alcohol; the more recent interpersonal variant on the psychodynamic perspective focuses on difficulties in a person’s past and present relationships that contribute to drinking; the behavioral viewpoint focuses on faulty learning of habits to reduce stress (drinking alcohol) and environmental conditions that may be exacerbating or maintaining the condition; and the cognitive-behavioral viewpoint focuses on maladaptive thinking including deficits in problem solving and information process- ing, such as irrational beliefs about the need for alcohol to reduce stress. Thus which perspective we adopt has important conse- quences: It influences our   perception of maladaptive behavior , the   types of evidence we look for , and   the way in which we are likely to interpret data . A wide range of psychological causal fac- tors have been implicated in the origins of maladaptive behav- ior, and some of these different viewpoints provide contrasting (or sometimes complementary) explanations for how the causal factors exert their effects. (See Figure 3.10 above.)  in review  •   Contrast the newer psychodynamic perspectives—ego psychol- ogy, object-relations theory, and the interpersonal and attach- ment theory perspectives—with the earlier, Freudian perspective.  •   What is the central theme of the behavioral perspective, and what has been its impact?  •   How do classical and instrumental (operant) conditioning, gener- alization, discrimination, and observational learning contribute to the origins of abnormal behavior?  •   What is the focus of the cognitive-behavioral perspective, and what has been its impact? Some interpret terrifying scenes in a horror movie and the sensations of their heart pounding as a sign of excitement and having a good time; others interpret the same scenes and sensations as if something dangerous and scary is really happening. Cognitive-behavioral psychologists emphasize that the way we interpret an event can dramatically color our emotional reactions to it.  Psychodynamic Viewpoint   “He’s reducing intrapsychic conflict and anxiety.”  Cognitive-Behavioral Viewpoint  “He’s thinking about his problems the wrong way, and he irrationally believes that alcohol will reduce his stress.” “He’s learned the wrong habits for reducing stress and he has a stressful job.”  Behavioral Viewpoint  Person Drinking Alcohol Excessively  Three Major Psychosocial Perspectives  figure   3.10  Three major psychological perspectives on alcohol dependence.
•   Why are schemas and self-schemas so important for understand- ing abnormal behavior and its treatment?  •   What role do cognitive distortions and attributions have in psy- chopathology, according to the cognitive-behavioral perspective?  Psychological Causal Factors  We begin life with few built-in patterns and a great capacity to learn from experience. What we do learn from our experi- ences may help us face challenges resourcefully and may lead to resilience in the face of future stressors. Unfortunately, some of our experiences may be much less helpful in our later lives, and we may be deeply influenced by factors in early childhood over which we have no control. One good example of ways in which the events in one child’s life may be vastly different from those in another child’s life is whether they are   predictable   or   controllable . At one extreme are children who grow up in stable and lovingly indulgent environments, buffered to a large extent from the harsher realities of the world; at the other extreme are children whose experiences consist of constant exposure to unpredictable and uncontrollable frightening events or unspeakable cruelties. Such different experiences have corresponding effects on the adults’ schemas about the world and about the self: Some sug- gest a world that is uniformly loving, unthreatening, and benign, which of course it is not; others suggest a jungle in which safety and perhaps even life itself are constantly in the balance. Given a preference in terms of likely outcomes, most of us would opt for the former of these sets of experiences. However, these actu- ally may not be the best blueprint for engaging the real world, because it may be important to encounter some stressors and learn ways to deal with them in order to gain a sense of control (e.g., Barlow, 2002; Seligman, 1975) or self-efficacy (Bandura, 1986, 1997). Exposure to multiple uncontrollable and unpredictable frightening events is likely to leave a person vulnerable to anxiety and negative affect, a central problem in a number of mental disorders such as anxiety and depression. For example, Barlow’s (1988, 2002) and Mineka’s (1985b; Mineka & Zinbarg, 1996, 2006) models emphasize the important role that experience with unpredictable and uncontrollable negative outcomes has in creating stress, anxiety, and depression (see also Abramson et al., 1978; Chorpita, 2001; Chorpita & Barlow, 1998; Seligman, 1975). It is important to note that a person exposed to the same frequency and intensity of negative outcomes that are predictable and/or controllable will experience less stress and be less likely to develop anxiety or depression. In this section we will examine the types of psychological factors that make people vulnerable to disorder or that may pre- cipitate disorder. Psychological factors are those developmental influences—often unpredictable and uncontrollable negative events—that may handicap a person psychologically, making him or her less resourceful in coping with events. (However, it is important to remember that psychological causal factors are always ultimately mediated by changes that take place in our nervous systems when emotions are activated and when new learning takes place.) We will focus on four categories of psychological causal factors that can each have important det- rimental effects on a child’s socioemotional development: (1) early deprivation or trauma, (2) inadequate parenting styles, (3) marital discord and divorce, and (4) maladaptive peer rela- tionships, also shown in Figure 3.11. Such factors typically do not operate alone. Rather, they interact with each other and with other psychological factors, as well as with particular genetic and temperamental factors and with particular sociocultural settings or environments. In other words, although psychological fac- tors are often studied independently of genetic, temperamental, and sociocultural factors, a more comprehensive biopsychosocial understanding should be the ultimate goal. We now turn to the four different categories of psychologi- cal causal factors.  early Deprivation or Trauma  Children who do not have the resources that are typically sup- plied by parents or parental surrogates may be left with deep and sometimes irreversible psychological scars. The needed resources range from food and shelter to love and attention. Deprivation of such resources can occur in several forms. The most severe manifestations of deprivation are usually seen among abandoned or orphaned children, who may be either institutionalized or placed in a succession of unwholesome and inadequate foster homes. However, it can also occur in intact families where, for one reason or another, parents are unable (for instance, because of mental disorder) or unwilling to provide close and frequent human attention and nurturing. We can interpret the consequences of parental deprivation from several psychological viewpoints. Such deprivation might result in fixation at the oral stage of psychosexual development (Freud); it might interfere with the development of basic trust (Erikson); it might retard the attainment of needed skills because of a lack of available reinforcements (Skinner); or it might result in the child’s acquiring dysfunctional schemas and self-schemas in which relationships are represented as unstable, untrust- worthy, and without affection (Beck). Any of these viewpoints might be the best way of conceptualizing the problems that arise  •   Early deprivation or trauma  •   Inadequate parenting styles  •   Marital discord and divorce  •   Maladaptive peer relationships  figure   3.11  Psychological Causal Factors.
in a particular case, or some combination of them might be superior to any single one because, as we have noted, the causal pathways are usually multidimensional. (See Figure 3.12.)  INSTITuTIoNAlIzATIoN   In some cases children are raised in an institution where, compared with an ordinary home, there is likely to be less warmth and physical contact; less intellectual, emotional, and social stimulation; and a lack of encouragement and help in positive learning. Current estimates are that worldwide up to 8 million children live in orphanages (Bos et al., 2011). Research done when institutionalization was more common in the United States and the United Kingdom makes it clear that the long-range prognosis for most children who suffer early and prolonged environmental and social deprivation through institu- tionalization is unfavorable, especially if the institutionalization lasts longer than 6 months (Beckett et al., 2006; Kreppner et al., 2007; Wiik et al., 2011). Many children institutionalized in infancy and early childhood show severe emotional, behavioral, and learning problems and are at risk for disturbed attachment relationships and psychopathology (e.g., Bos et al., 2011; Ellis et al., 2004; Smyke et al., 2007). At least some of these problems may be the result of delayed maturation in brain electrical activity (McLaughlin et al., 2010). Institutionalization later in childhood of a child who has already had good attachment experiences was not found to be so damaging (Rutter, 1987). However, even some of the children institutionalized at an early age show resilience and do well in adolescence and adulthood (Kreppner et al., 2007; Rutter et al., 2001). In some cases this is because of influential protective factors, which include having some positive experi- ences at school, whether in the form of social relationships or athletic or academic success, and having a supportive marital partner in adulthood; these successes probably contribute to a better sense of self-esteem or self-efficacy (Quinton & Rutter, 1988; Rutter, 1985; Rutter et al., 2001). Fortunately, the results of this line of research have had a major impact on public policy in this and some other societies, which have recognized the need to place such children in foster or adoptive families rather than in institutions (see Johnson, 2000; Rutter, 2006). Accordingly, conducting research on the effects of institutionalization in Western societies is less urgent today—and less feasible—than it once was. Unfortunately, however, enlight- ened policies have not been implemented in some Eastern European countries and in some other parts of the world, where the plight of children in orphanages has often been deplorable (e.g., Johnson, 2000). We focus here on research conducted on children adopted from these Eastern European orphanages because they have been most widely studied (e.g., McLaughlin et al., 2010). Many children whose infancy was spent in these Eastern European orphanages were later adopted into homes in North America and the United Kingdom. For children who spent a significant period of time in one of these deplorable institu- tions in their first year or two of life, there were very significant intellectual, language, and growth deficits, and even more time spent in the institution was related to more severe deficits. Serious physiological, behavioral, psychological, and social problems also arose (e.g., Bos et al., 2011; Gunnar et al., 2001; Rutter, 2006). At least in one study the physiological changes extended to brain development, with children with severe institutional deprivation showing reduced overall brain volume, although the volumes of their amygdala, which is involved in emotion regulation were enhanced (Mehta et al., 2009). When retested several years after being placed in good adoptive homes, most such children showed significant improvement in most of these areas, although they still showed deficits compared to adoptive infants who had not been  These Romanian orphans spend most of their days in their cribs. The lack of physical contact and social stimulation and support causes many children who are often institutionalized starting in infancy and early childhood to show severe emotional, behavioral, and learning problems. They are also at elevated risk for psychopathology.  Viewpoints on Parental Deprivation  Beck: “The child develops dysfunctional schemas about relationships.” Erikson: “Basic trust does not develop.” Freud: “Fixation at the oral stage of development.” Skinner: “Lack of reinforcements retards skill development.”  figure   3.12  Viewpoints on Parental Deprivation.
institutionalized. For one of these studies, a more recent follow-up of Romanian adoptees in the United Kingdom when the children were 11 years of age has shown a wide variety of outcomes. About half of the children continued to show multiple impairments, and only about one-quarter showed fairly normal functioning across many domains (Kreppner et al., 2007; see also Wiik et al., 2011). Generally, the earlier the children were adopted (and therefore the less time they spent in the deplorable orphanages), the better they did (see Johnson, 2000, for a review; Rutter et al., 1999).  NeGleCT AND ABuSe IN THe HoMe   Most infants subjected to parental deprivation are not separated from their parents but, rather, suffer from maltreatment at home. In the United States, approximately 2.6 to 3.4 million reports of abuse and neglect are made annually, and about 33 to 40 percent are found to be ac- curate (Cicchetti & Toth, 2005; Watts-English et al., 2006). This means that about 12 out of every 1,000 children are known to be victims of abuse or neglect, with countless numbers of other unreported cases. Parents can neglect a child in various ways—by physical neglect, denial of love and affection, lack of interest in the child’s activities and achievements, or failure to spend time with the child or to supervise his or her activities. Cases of paren- tal abuse (which are less common than neglect; De Bellis, 2005) involve cruel treatment in the form of emotional, physical, or sex- ual abuse. Parental neglect and abuse may be partial or complete, passive or active, or subtly or overtly cruel. Outright parental abuse (physical or sexual or both) of children has been associated with many negative effects on their emotional, intellectual, and physical development, although some studies have suggested that, at least among infants, gross neglect may be worse than having an abusive relationship. Abused children often have a tendency to be overly aggressive (both verbally and physically), even to the extent of bully- ing. Some even respond with anger and aggression to friendly overtures from peers (e.g., Cicchetti & Toth, 2005; Emery & Laumann-Billings, 1998). Researchers have also found that mal- treated children often have difficulties in linguistic development and significant problems in behavioral, emotional, and social functioning, including conduct disorder, depression and anxi- ety, and impaired relationships with peers, who tend to avoid or reject them (Collishaw, Pickles, et al., 2007; Shonk & Cicchetti, 2001). Such adverse consequences are perhaps not surprising given the multitude of very long-lasting negative neurobiological effects that maltreatment has on the developing nervous system (Gunnar & Quevedo, 2007; Watts-English et al., 2006). For example, an important 30-year follow-up study of individuals born on the Isle of Wight in the 1960s who reported having been physically or sexually abused as children found that about two-thirds of them had elevated rates of both adolescent and adult psychopathology compared to individuals who did not report such abuse. A recent quantitative review also reported adverse effects of childhood abuse on numerous adult physical health outcomes (Wegman & Stetler, 2009). Abused and maltreated infants and toddlers are also quite likely to develop atypical patterns of attachment—most often a  disorganized   and   disoriented   style of attachment   (Barnett, Ganiban, & Cicchetti, 1999; Crittenden & Ainsworth, 1989), character- ized by insecure, disorganized, and inconsistent behavior with the primary caregiver. For example, such a child might at one point act dazed and show frozen behavior when reunited with his or her caregiver. However, at another point he or she might actually approach the caregiver but then immediately reject and avoid her. A significant portion of these children continue to show these confused patterns of relating to their caregiver up to at least age 13. Moreover, because such children’s internal models of themselves in relationships to important others often generalize to new relationships, they are likely to expect others to treat them in a similar negative manner and to not expect that they will fare well in such relationships. Consequently, they may selectively avoid new experiences that could correct their expec- tations (Cicchetti & Toth, 1995a; Shields et al., 2001). These effects of early abuse may endure into adolescence and adulthood. For example, previously abused or neglected children have, on average, lower levels of education, employ- ment, and earnings (Currie & Widom, 2010). Several reviews have concluded that childhood physical abuse predicts both familial and nonfamilial violence in adolescence and adulthood, especially in abused men (Cicchetti & Toth, 1995a; Serbin & Karp. 2004). Thus, a significant proportion of parents who reject or abuse their children have themselves been the victims of parental rejection. Their early history of rejection or abuse would clearly have had damaging effects on their schemas and self-schemas, and they were probably unable to internalize good models of parenting (e.g., Serbin & Karp. 2004; Shields et al., 2001). Kaufman and Zigler (1989) estimated that there is about a 30 percent chance of this pattern of intergenerational transmis- sion of abuse (see also Cicchetti & Toth, 1995a). Nevertheless, it is important to remember that maltreated children—whether the maltreatment comes from abuse or from deprivation—can improve to at least some extent when the care- giving environment improves (Cicchetti & Toth, 1995a; Emery & Laumann-Billings, 1998). Moreover, there are always a range of effects, and those children who are least likely to show these negative outcomes tend to have one or more protective factors such as a good relationship with some adult during childhood, a higher IQ, positive school experiences, or physical attractiveness.  SePArATIoN   Bowlby (1960, 1973) first summarized the trau- matic effects, for children from 2 to 5 years old, of being separated from their parents during prolonged periods of hospitalization. First, there are the short-term or acute effects of the separation, which can include significant despair during the separation as well as detachment from the parents upon reunion; Bowlby considered this to be a normal response to prolonged separation, even in in- fants with a   secure attachment . However, he also found evidence that children who undergo a number of such separations may
develop an   insecure attachment . In addition, there can be longer- term effects of early separation from one or both parents. For example, such separations can cause an increased vulnerability to stressors in adulthood, making it more likely that the person will become depressed (Bowlby, 1980) or show other psychiatric symp- toms (Canetti et al., 2000; Carlson et al., 2003). As with other early traumatic experiences, the long-term effects of separation depend heavily on whether support and reassurance are given a child by parents or other significant people, which is most likely if the child has a secure relationship with at least one parent (Canetti et al., 2000; Carlson & Sroufe, 1995). Interestingly, many children who experience even a parent’s death do not exhibit discernible long-term effects (Brown et al., 1985; Canetti et al., 2000).  Inadequate Parenting Styles  Even in the absence of severe deprivation, neglect, or trauma, many kinds of deviations in parenting can have profound effects on a child’s subsequent ability to cope with life’s challenges and thus can create a child’s vulnerability to various forms of psycho- pathology. Therefore, although their explanations vary consider- ably, the psychological viewpoints on causes of psychopathology all focus on the behavioral tendencies a child acquires in the course of early social interaction with others—chiefly parents or parental surrogates (e.g., Parke, 2004; Sroufe et al., 2000). You should keep in mind that a parent–child relationship is always bidirectional: As in any continuing relationship, the behav- ior of each person affects the behavior of the other. Some children are easier to love than others; some parents are more sensitive than others to an infant’s needs (e.g., Parke, 2004). For example, par- ents who have babies with difficult temperaments (who are very prone to negative moods) find it difficult and stressful to deal with their babies (e.g., Putnam et al., 2002; Rutter, 2006). For a second example, in an early study, Rutter and Quinton (1984) found that parents tended to react with irritability, hostility, and criticism to children who were high in negative mood and low on adaptabil- ity (see also Crouter & Booth, 2003). This in turn may set such children at risk for psychopathology because they become a “focus for discord” in the family (Rutter, 1990, p. 191).  PAreNTAl PSyCHoPATHoloGy   In general, it has been found that parents who have various forms of psychopathol- ogy (including schizophrenia, depression, antisocial personality disorder, and alcohol use problems) tend to have one or more children who are at heightened risk for a wide range of devel- opmental difficulties (unless protective factors are also present; Brennan et al., 2003; Masten, 2007). The focus of most research in this area has been on mothers, but there is good evidence that fathers with mental disorders or others who are minimally involved in caretaking in infancy can also make significant con- tributions to child and adolescent psychopathology, especially to problems such as depression, conduct disorder, delinquency, and attention-deficit disorder (e.g., Boyce, et al., 2006; Hammen, 2009; Phares et al., 2002). Although some of these effects un- doubtedly have a genetic component, many researchers believe that genetic influences cannot account for all of the adverse ef- fects that parental psychopathology can have on children (e.g., Hammen, 2009; Sher et al., 2005; Speranza et al., 2006). Consider some examples. Although many children of people with serious alcohol abuse problems do not have difficulties, oth- ers have elevated rates of truancy, substance abuse, and a greater likelihood of dropping out of school, as well as higher levels of anxiety and depression and lower levels of self-esteem (Leonard & Eiden, 2007; Marmorstein et al., 2009; Sher et al., 2005). In addition, the children of seriously depressed parents are at enhanced risk for depression and other disorders themselves (Burt et al., 2005; Cicchetti & Toth, 1998; Hammen, 2009), at least partly because depression makes for unskillful parenting— notably including either intrusive or withdrawn behavior (Field et al., 2006), excessive criticism, and ineffectiveness in managing and disciplining the children (Cicchetti & Toth, 1998; Rogosch et al., 2004). Not surprisingly, children of depressed mothers are also more likely than children of nondepressed mothers to have insecure attachment relationships (Cicchetti & Toth, 1995b) and to live in environments with high levels of stress (e.g., Hammen, 2009).  PAreNTING STyleS: wArMTH AND CoNTrol   Less ex- treme differences in parenting styles than those that may occur with various forms of parental psychopathology or parental abuse can also have a significant impact on children’s development and increase their risk for psychopathology. In the past, discipline was conceived of as a method for both punishing undesirable behavior and preventing or deterring such behavior in the future. Discipline is now thought of more positively as providing needed structure and guidance for promoting a child’s healthy growth. Such guidance provides a child with schemas similar to outcomes actually meted out by the world, which are contingent on a per- son’s behavior. This allows the child a sense of control over these outcomes and her or his freedom to make deliberate choices. When punishment is deemed necessary, it is important that a  Inadequate parenting styles can have profound effects on a child’s subsequent ability to cope with life’s challenges and thus create vulner- ability to various forms of psychopathology.
parent make clear exactly what behavior is inappropriate and what behavior is expected, and that positive and consistent meth- ods of discipline be worked out for dealing with infractions. Researchers have been interested in how parenting styles— including their disciplinary styles—affect children’s behavior over the course of development. A parenting style reflects an attitude and values that are expressed toward a child across a wide range of settings (L. R. Williams et al., 2009). Four types of parenting styles have been identified that seem to be related to different developmental outcomes for the children: (1) authoritative, (2) authoritarian, (3) permissive/indulgent, and (4) neglectful/unin- volved. These styles vary in the degree of   parental warmth   (amount of support, encouragement, and affection versus shame, rejec- tion, and hostility) and in the degree of   parental control   (extent of discipline and monitoring versus leaving the children largely unsupervised; Emery & Kitzmann, 1995; Manzeske & Stright, 2009; Morris, 2001). (See Figure 3.13 on p. 88.) Parental control includes both behavioral control (rewards and punishments) and psychological control (e.g., expression of approval versus disap- proval, or guilt induction).  Authoritative Parenting   The   authoritative style   is one in which the parents are both very warm and very careful to set clear standards and limits on certain kinds of behaviors while allowing considerable freedom within these limits. They tend to be atten- tive and sensitive to their needs while still enforcing their limits. This style of parenting is associated with the most positive early social development; the children tend to be energetic and friendly and to show development of general competencies for dealing with others and with their environments (Baumrind, 1993; Siegler et al., 2003; Simons et al., 2005). They also usually have secure attachment relationships (Karavasilis et al., 2003) and show high levels of overall well-being, as well as good school performance when followed into late adolescence (Berk, 2003; Slicker & Thornberry, 2002). Not surprisingly they also are less likely to exhibit either emotional disorders (e.g., anxiety and depression) or behavioural problem such as conduct problems and delinquency (L. R. Williams et al., 2009). Recent work has also shown that authoritative parenting is often effective in promoting resilience in children living in highly stressful contexts induced by war, con- flict, and displacement (Salem-Pickartz & Donnelly, 2007).  Authoritarian Parenting   Parents with an   authoritarian style   are high on control but low on warmth. They often appear quite cold and demanding, favoring punitive methods if their children disobey. Their children tend to be conflicted, irritable, and moody (Baumrind, 1975, 1993; Berk, 2003; Siegler et al., 2003). When followed into adolescence, these children tend to be lower in social and academic competence than children of author- itative parents, with boys doing particularly poorly in social and cognitive skills. Boys with authoritarian fathers—especially those high on hostility—are also at heightened risk of engaging in sub- stance abuse and other delinquent activity (Bronte-Tinkew et al., 2006; Hoeve et al., 2009). If such authoritarian parents also use overly severe discipline in the form of physical punishment—as opposed to the withdrawal of approval and privileges—the result tends to be increased aggressive behavior on the part of the child (Berk, 2003; Emery & Kitzmann, 1995).  Permissive/Indulgent Parenting   Parents with a   permis- sive/indulgent style   are high on warmth but low on discipline and control. This lenient style of parenting is associated with impulsive and aggressive behavior in childhood and adolescence (Baumrind, 1967; Hetherington & Parke, 1993; Siegler et al., 2003). Overly indulged children are characteristically spoiled, selfish, impatient, inconsiderate, and demanding (Baumrind, 1971, 1975). In ado- lescence, they tend to do less well academically and to show more antisocial behaviors (e.g., Steinberg et al., 2006). Confusion and difficulties in adjustment may occur when “reality” forces them to reassess their assumptions about themselves and the world.  Neglectful/uninvolved Parenting   Finally, parents who are low both on warmth and on control exhibit the   neglectful/ uninvolved style . They tend to be disengaged and not supportive of their children. This style of parental uninvolvement is associated with disruptions in attachment during early childhood (Egeland & Sroufe, 1981; Karavasilis et al., 2003) and with moodiness, low  Healthy parenting styles are those that reflect warmth and clear limits and restrictions regarding certain kinds of behaviors while allowing con- siderable freedom within certain boundaries. The children raised in these environments tend to be energetic and friendly and show general com- petencies for dealing with others.
self-esteem, and conduct problems later in childhood (Baumrind, 1991; Hetherington & Parke, 1993). These children of uninvolved parents also have problems with peer relations and with academic performance (Hetherington & Parke, 1993; see also Berk, 2003).  Marital Discord and Divorce  Disturbed parent–child patterns such as parental rejection are rarely found in severe form unless the total familial context is also abnormal. Thus disturbed family structure is an overarching risk factor that increases an individual’s vulnerability to particu- lar stressors. We will distinguish between intact families where there is significant marital discord and families that have been disrupted by divorce or separation.  MArITAl DISCorD   Whatever the reasons for marital discord, when it is long-standing it is likely to be frustrating, hurtful, and generally damaging in its effects on both adults and their children (e.g., Amato, 2006; Amato & Booth, 2001; Parke, 2004). More severe cases of marital discord may expose children to one or more of the stressors we have already discussed: child abuse or neglect, the effects of living with a parent with a serious mental disorder, authoritarian or neglectful/uninvolved parenting, and spouse abuse. But even less severe cases of marital discord also have negative ef- fects on many children. For example, one study showed that chil- dren of parents with high levels of overt conflict showed a greater disposition to behave aggressively toward both their peers and their parents than children from less conflictual marriages (Cummings et al., 2004; Du Rocher et al., 2004; see also Amato, 2006). Another study found that college students who reported high levels of mari- tal conflict in their parents also showed elevated conflict in their own romantic relationships, which in turn was linked to poorer quality of their own romantic relationships (Cui & Fincham, 2010). Interestingly, one study found that children could be buff- ered against many of the damaging effects of marital conflict if one or both parents had the following characteristics: warmth, prone- ness to giving praise and approval, and ability to inhibit rejecting behavior toward their children (Katz & Gottman, 1997). Several recent longitudinal studies have clearly documented that the damaging effects of serious marital discord on children continue into adulthood: The offspring’s own marriages are more likely to be marked by discord (whether or not the par- ents divorced). Some of this intergenerational transmission of marital discord may be the result of the offspring having learned negative interaction styles by observing their own parents’ mari- tal interactions (Amato, 2006; Amato & Booth, 2001).  DIVorCeD FAMIlIeS   Partly as a consequence of a grow- ing cultural acceptance of divorce, approximately a million divorces now occur yearly in the United States, according to the National Center for Health Statistics (as cited in Divorce Statistics Collection, 2005). Estimates are that about 20 percent of children under the age of 18 are living in a single-parent household—some with unwed parents and some with divorced parents. Nearly half of all marriages end in divorce, and it has been estimated that 50 to 60 percent of children born in the  Parents are high on warmth and moderate on control, very careful to set clear limits and restrictions regarding certain kinds of behaviors.  Research Shows:  Children tend to be friendly and to show development of general competencies for dealing with others and with their environments.  Authoritative   Permissive/ Indulgent  Parents are high on warmth and low on control and discipline.  Research Shows:  Children tend to be impulsive and aggressive. Overly indulged children are characteristically spoiled, selfish, impatient, inconsiderate, and demanding.  Neglectful/ Uninvolved  Parents are low on warmth and low on control.  Research Shows:  Children tend to be moody and to have low self-esteem and conduct problems later in childhood. They also have problems with peer relations and with academic performance.  Authoritarian  Parents are low on warmth and high on control and often cold and demanding.  Research Shows:  Children tend to be conflicted, irritable, and moody. When followed into adolescence, these children have more negative outcomes, the boys doing particularly poorly in social and cognitive skills.  figure   3.13  Parenting Styles.
1990s would live at some point in single-parent families (Amato, 2010; Hetherington et al., 1998).  effects of Divorce on Parents   Unhappy marriages are difficult, but ending a marital relationship can also be enormously stressful for the adults, both mentally and physically. The nega- tive effects are often temporary, with most people being able to adapt constructively within 2 to 3 years, but some adults never fully recover (Amato, 2000; Hetherington, 2003a). Divorced and separated persons are overrepresented among psychiatric patients, although the   direction of the causal relationship   is not always clear. In their original comprehensive reviews of the effects of divorce on adults, Amato and Keith (1991a) concluded that it is a major source of psychopathology as well as of physical ill- ness, death, suicide, and homicide. It should also be recognized, however, that divorce actually benefits some individuals (Amato, 2000, 2010)—with some evidence that women are more likely to benefit than men (Hetherington, 2003a). There is also some evidence that individuals who were in high-distress marriages before divorce are more likely to show an increase in happiness than are individuals who were in low-distress marriages before divorce (Amato & Hohmann-Marriott, 2007). In addition, favorable adjustment after divorce is positively associated with higher income, dating someone steadily, remarriage, having had relatively favorable attitudes toward divorce before it happened, and being the partner who initiated the divorce (Amato, 2000).  effects of Divorce on Children   Divorce can have trau- matic effects on children, too. Feelings of insecurity and rejection may be aggravated by conflicting loyalties and, sometimes, by the spoiling the children may receive while staying with one of the parents. Not surprisingly, some children do develop serious mal- adaptive responses. Temperamentally difficult children are likely to have a more difficult time adjusting than are temperamentally easy children (Hetherington et al., 1989). Somewhat ironically, difficult children may be the ones whose parents are more likely to divorce, perhaps because having difficult children is likely to exac- erbate marital problems (Block et al., 1986; Hetherington, 1999). Delinquency and a wide range of other psychological prob- lems such as anxiety and depression are much more frequent among children and adolescents from divorced families than among those from intact families, although it is likely that a con- tributing factor here is prior or continuing parental strife (Chase- Lansdale et al., 1995; Strohschein, 2005). However, findings also show that, on average, such children had shown these problems to some degree even before their parents divorced (Amato, 2010; Strohschein, 2005). In addition, a number of studies have dem- onstrated that the adverse effects of divorce on adaptive function- ing may persist into adulthood. On average, compared to young adults from families without divorce, young adults from divorced families have somewhat lower educational attainment, lower incomes, lower life satisfaction, and an increased probability of being on welfare and having children out of wedlock (Chase- Lansdale et al., 1995; Hetherington et al., 1998). Children from divorced families are also more likely to have their own marriages end in divorce (Amato & DeBoer, 2001; Hetherington, 2003b). One particularly interesting study found that these long-lasting effects even occurred in a subsequent third generation. Specifically, in a study of nearly 700 grandparents and their grandchildren, Amato and Cheadle (2005) found that divorce in the grandparents was associated with lower education, more marital discord, and weaker parental ties in the grandchildren. Nevertheless, many children adjust quite well to the divorce of their parents. Indeed, a quantitative review of 92 studies on paren- tal divorce and the well-being of children, conducted on 13,000 children from 1950 to 1990, concluded that the average negative effects of divorce on children are actually quite modest (Amato, 2010; Amato & Keith, 1991b; see also Emery, 1999; Hethering- ton, 2003b), as are the negative effects persisting into adulthood (Amato & Keith, 1991b). Amato and Keith (1991a, 1991b) also found that the negative effects of divorce seemed to decrease from the 1950s through the 1980s (particularly since 1970), perhaps because the stigma of divorce was decreasing. However, a follow-up review of 67 such studies published in the 1990s showed no further decreases in these negative effects since 1990 (Amato, 2001). The effects of divorce on children are often more favorable than the effects of remaining in a home torn by marital conflict and dissension (Amato, 2010; Amato & Keith, 1991b; Hetherington et al., 1998). At one time it was thought that the detrimental effects of divorce might be minimized if a successful remarriage provided an adequate environment for childrearing. Unfortunately, however, the Amato and Keith (1991b) review revealed that children living with a stepparent were often no better off than children living with a single parent, although this was more true for girls than for boys. Other studies have shown that children—especially very young children—living with a stepparent are at increased risk for physical abuse (injury and even death) by the stepparent relative to children living with two biological parents (Daly & Wilson, 1988, 1996).  Maladaptive Peer relationships  Important peer relationships usually begin in the preschool years. Children at this stage are hardly masters of the fine points of human relationships or diplomacy. Empathy—the appreciation  research close-up  Direction of the Causal Relationship  Recall that, in a correlational or observational study, an as- sociation between two variables does not allow us to make inferences about causal direction. For example, divorce could precipitate psychological problems. Alternatively, people with psychological disorders might be more likely to have prob- lematic marriages and end up divorced.
of another’s situation, perspective, and feelings—is at best only primitively developed. We can see this in a child who rejects a current playmate when a more favored playmate arrives. The child’s own immediate satisfaction tends to be the primary goal of any interaction, and there is only an uncertain recognition that cooperation and collaboration may bring even greater benefits. A substantial minority of children seem somehow ill equipped for the rigors and competition of the school years, often because of temperamental factors in the child or dysfunctional family situ- ations. A significant number of them withdraw from their peers and become loners. A significant number of others (especially males) adopt physically intimidating and aggressive lifestyles, often becoming schoolyard or neighborhood bullies. Being either a loner or a bully does not bode well for good mental health outcomes (e.g., Dodge et al., 1997; Heilbron & Prinstein, 2010; Reijntjes et al., 2011). This is in part because both often lead to peer exclusion and peer abuse. Chronic peer exclusion is par- ticularly likely to lead to decreased classroom participation and declining school performance, whereas peer abuse is particularly likely to lead to actual avoidance of school (Buhs et al., 2006). Several studies have found bullies to show high levels of both proactive aggression (where they initiate the aggressive behavior) and reactive aggression (where they overreact when confronted; e.g., Salmivalli & Nieminen, 2002; Salmivalli, 2010). Although some bullies probably behave this way because of deficits in social skills, others (often the ringleader in a group of bullies) have a more sophisticated understanding of social behavior, which enables them to manipulate and organize their peers (often driven by status goals) so that they can avoid being caught while making others suf- fer (Salmivalli, 2010; Sutton et al., 1999). Although most children profess attitudes against bullying, when bullying actually occurs, most students do nothing to intervene or support the victim (and as many as 20 to 30% actually encourage the bully; Salmivalli, 2010 Salmivalli & Voeten, 2004). A small percentage (approximately 20%), however, do take the side of the victim and may even help defend him or her. Victims who have one or more classmates defend them show less distress and higher self-esteem. In recent years a new form of particularly insidious bullying has emerged as an enormous problem in many North American schools. Cyberbullying , as it is called, includes sending offensive, harassing, or intimidating messages over the Internet, spreading ugly rumors on certain Internet sites, and spreading someone’s very personal information (Willard, 2007). Some estimate that as many as one-third of teenagers who use the Internet engage in cyberbullying (Li, 2007; Scharnberg, 2007). The psychological consequences of cyberbullying on the victims can be very seri- ous—including anxiety, school phobia, lower self-esteem, sui- cidal ideation, and occasional cases of suicide (Thomas, 2006). Fortunately, there is another side to this coin. Peer rela- tions can be difficult, but they can also be sources of key learn- ing experiences that stand an individual in good stead for many years. For a resourceful child, the winning and losing and the successes and failures of the school years provide excellent train- ing in coming to grips with the real world and with her or his developing self—its capabilities and limitations, its attractive and unattractive qualities. The experience of intimacy with a friend has its beginning in this period of intense social involve- ment. If all goes well, a child emerges into adolescence with a considerable repertoire of social knowledge and skills that add up to social competence. Such resources can be strong protective factors against parental rejection, frustration, demoralization, despair, and mental disorder (Masten, 2007; Sentse et al., 2010).  SourCeS oF PoPulArITy VerSuS rejeCTIoN   What determines which children will be popular and which will be rejected? There seem to be two types of popular children—the prosocial and the antisocial types.   Prosocial   popular children communicate with their peers in friendly and assertive yet co- operative ways. They tend to be good students relative to their less popular peers (Zettergreen, 2003).   Antisocial   popular chil- dren—usually boys—tend to be “tough boys” who may be ath- letically skilled but who do poorly academically. They tend to be highly aggressive and defiant of authority (see Berk, 2003). Far more attention has been devoted to determining why some children are persistently rejected by their peers and what the consequences are of such rejection. There also appear to be two types of rejected children—those who are too aggressive and those who are very withdrawn (Ladd, 2006). The rejected children who are aggressive take an excessively demanding or aggressive approach when interacting with their peers. They often take offense too readily and attribute hostile intent to the teasing of their peers, thus escalating confrontations to unin- tended levels (Dodge, 2006; Reijntjes et al., 2011). Indeed, the tendency to attribute hostile intent to others in grade 8 has been shown to predict levels of antisocial behavior in grade 11  Juvenile socializing is a risky business in which a child’s hard-won prestige in a group is probably perceived as being constantly in jeopardy. Actually, reputation and status in a group tend to be stable, and a child who has been rejected by peers is likely to continue to have problems in peer relationships.
(Lansford et al., 2006). Such children also tend to take a more punitive and less forgiving attitude toward such situations (Coie et al., 1991; Crick & Dodge, 1994; Reijntjes et al., 2011). This may be especially likely in children who have been maltreated by their parents and have therefore developed maladaptive mental representations of caregivers and expect maltreatment. Expecting maltreatment, they may approach social situations with hyper- arousal, anxiety, and angry reactivity, which may be consistent with what they have experienced at home but is out of synch with the context they share with peers (Cicchetti & Toth, 2005; Shields et al., 2001). In addition, having a poor ability to under- stand a peer’s emotions (such as fear and sadness) in kindergar- ten also predicts aggressive behavior toward peers in the third grade (Dodge et al., 2002). Being rejected and being aggressive at one point in child- hood greatly increases the probability of aggressive and delin- quent behavior later on, especially in boys (Coie, 2004; Ladd, 2006; Reijntjes et al., 2011). For example, one study followed 585 children from kindergarten through the eighth grade. Results showed that those who had hostile knowledge structures (schemas) early in childhood were more likely to develop consis- tent aggressive behaviors over an 8-year follow-up period (Burks et al., 1999; see also Laird et al., 2001). The second subset of children who may become chronic victims of rejection are not aggressive but, rather, are highly unas- sertive and quite submissive toward their peers, often because of social anxiety and fear of being scorned or attacked (Schwartz et al., 1993). Such isolation is likely to have serious consequences because it often leads to peer rejection, which in turn deprives a child of further opportunities to learn the rules of social behavior and interchange, rules that become more sophisticated and subtle with increasing age (Coie, 1990; Ladd, 2006). Repeated social failure or becoming the victim of bullies is the usual result, which has further damaging effects on self-confidence and self-esteem and sometimes leads to loneliness, depression, and anxiety, espe- cially during the elementary school years (Burks et al., 1995; Ladd, 2006). In summary, both logic and research findings suggest the same conclusion: A child who fails to establish satisfactory rela- tionships with peers during the developmental years is deprived of a crucial set of background experiences and is at higher-than- average risk for a variety of negative outcomes in adolescence and adulthood including depression, school dropout, suicidal ideation, and delinquency (Coie, 2004; Heilbron & Prinstein, 2010; Ladd, 2006). However, one should also remember that the peer social problems may also be early markers of disorders that have a heritable component but do not become full blown until later in adolescence or adulthood. What is often going on in such cases is that the peer social problems indeed reflect some heritable diathesis, but they also serve as stressors that make it more likely that the underlying vulnerability will lead to full- blown disorder later (Parker et al., 1995; see also Coie, 2004; Rutter, 2006).  in review  •   What are the most important effects of a child’s being exposed to early deprivation or abuse?  •   What kinds of effects does parental psychopathology have on children?  •   What kinds of influences do different parenting styles tend to have on children’s development? (Consider especially the vari- ables of parental warmth and parental control.)  •   What is the typical range of effects that divorce and marital dis- cord can have on children? What about effects on adults?  •   What are two different types of popular children and two differ- ent types of rejected children?  The Sociocultural Viewpoint  By the beginning of the twentieth century, sociology and anthro- pology had emerged as independent scientific disciplines and were making rapid strides toward understanding the role of sociocultural factors in human development and behavior. Early sociocultural the- orists included such notables as Ruth Benedict, Abram Kardiner, Mar- garet Mead, and Franz Boas. Their investigations and writings showed that individual personality development reflects the larger society—its institutions, norms, values, and ideas—as well as the immediate fam- ily and other groups. Studies also made clear the relationship between various sociocultural conditions and mental disorders (for example, the relationship between the particular stressors in a given society and the types of mental disorders that typically occur in it). Further stud- ies showed that the patterns of both physical and mental disorders within a given society could change over time as sociocultural condi- tions change. These discoveries have added important new dimen- sions to modern perspectives on abnormal behavior (Fabrega, 2001; Tsai et al., 2001; Westermeyer & Janca, 1997).  uncovering Sociocultural Factors Through Cross-Cultural Studies  The sociocultural viewpoint is concerned with the impact of culture and other features of the social environment on mental disorders. The relationships are complex. It is one thing to observe that a person with a psychological disorder has come from a harsh environment. It is quite another to show empirically that these cir- cumstances were contributory causes of the disorder as opposed to being mere correlates of the disorder. Yet people raised in different societies and exposed to very different environments have provided natural “laboratories” of sorts, and cross-cultural research can enhance our knowledge about the range of variation that is pos- sible in human behavioral and emotional development. It can also generate ideas about what causes normal and abnormal behavior— ideas that can later be tested more rigorously in the laboratory (e.g., Rothbaum, Weisz et al., 1997; Weisz, et al., 2000, 2001).  uNIVerSAl AND CulTure-SPeCIFIC SyMPToMS oF DISorDerS   Research supports the view that many psychological disturbances—in both adults and children—are universal, appearing
in most cultures studied (Butcher, 1996b, Butcher, 2005; Kleinman, 1988; Verhulst & Achenbach, 1995). Studying such is- sues is, of course, never easy because of the need to adapt psychologi- cal tests across barriers of language and culture and to validate their use in other cultures. One example of such research has shown that when some tests are translated into the language of different cultures, they need to be adapted so that they are appropriate for the new cul- tural context. In addition, care must be taken not to miss what may be culture-specific elements of various disorders such as anxiety and depression (e.g., Sue & Chang, 2003; Weisz et al., 2006). The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI-2; see Chapter 4) is the best validated and most widely used test that has been adapted for use in many cultures (e.g., Butcher, 2011). For example, the basic pattern of disturbed thoughts and behaviors that we call schizophrenia can be found among nearly all peoples, although the prevalence and symptoms vary to some degree (Woo & Oei, 2007). Moreover, certain psychological symptoms, as measured, are consistently found among similarly diagnosed clinical groups in many other countries. For example, Butcher (1996a) found that psychiatric patients from Italy, Switzerland, Chile, India, Greece, and the United States who were diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia produced similar general personality and symptom patterns on the MMPI. The same MMPI-2 pattern was also found to occur among patients with schizophrenia in Japan (Hayama, 1999). Nevertheless, although some universal symptoms and pat- terns of symptoms appear, sociocultural factors often influence which disorders develop, the forms they take, how prevalent they are, and their courses. For example, the prevalence of major depressive disorder varies widely across the cultures of the world. In one study conducted in 10 countries around the world, the prevalence ranged from 3 percent in Japan to nearly 17 percent in the United States (Andrade et al., 2004). Differences can also emerge in the prognosis or outcomes of several severe mental disorders in different countries. Several international studies have found a more favorable course of schizophrenia in developing countries than in developed coun- tries (Kulhara & Chakrabarti, 2001). In another example, Kleinman (1986, 1988) compared the ways in which Chinese people (in Taiwan and the People’s Repub- lic of China) and Westerners deal with stress. He found that in Western societies, depression was a frequent reaction to individual stress. In China, on the other hand, he noted a relatively low rate of reported depression (Kleinman, 2004; see also Kirmayer & Groleau, 2001). Instead, the effects of stress were more typically manifested in physical problems such as fatigue, weakness, and other complaints. Moreover, Kleinman and Good (1985) surveyed the experience of depression across cultures. Their data show that important elements of depression in Western societies—for example, the acute sense of guilt typically experienced—do not appear in many other cultures. They also point out that the symptoms of depression, such as sad- ness, hopelessness, unhappiness, and a lack of pleasure in the things of the world and in social relationships, have dramatically different meanings in different societies. For Buddhists, seeking pleasure from things of the world and social relationships is the basis of all suf- fering; a willful disengagement is thus the first step toward achiev- ing enlightenment. For Shi’ite Muslims in Iran, grief is a religious experience associated with recognition of the tragic consequences of living justly in an unjust world; the ability to experience grief fully is thus a marker of depth of personality and understanding. In addition to the influence of culture on the symptoms experienced in different cultures, there are also entire patterns of symptoms in certain cultures that are unlike the patterns expe- rienced in most other parts of the world. Although a variety of these “culture-bound syndromes” will be discussed in various parts of this book, a few will serve to illustrate the general idea. In recent years, for example, a phenomenon known as   Hikiko- mori   has emerged as quite common in Japan, affecting as many as 700,000 individuals. This is a disorder of acute social with- drawal in which young people just remain in their room in their parents’ house and refuse social interactions for at least 6 months, but often for many years. The social withdrawal is ego-syntonic. Another example is   Zar   which occurs in both North Africa and the Middle East. With Zar a person who believes he or she is possessed by a spirit may experience a dissociative episode dur- ing which shouting, laughing, singing, or weeping may occur. The person may also show apathy and withdrawal, not eating or working. Numerous other examples of culture bound syndromes will be covered in subsequent chapters (such as   Koro   and   Taijin Kyofusho   discussed in Chapter 6).  CulTure AND oVer- AND uNDerCoNTrolleD BeHAVIor   Studies of the prevalence of different kinds of child- hood psychopathology in different cultures raise some fascinating issues. In cultures such as that of Thailand, adults are highly intol- erant of   undercontrolled behavior   such as aggression, disobedience,  Sociocultural factors influence the form and course of certain disorders. For example, in Western societies people suffering from stress frequently will become depressed. In China, stress is not manifested as depression but in physical problems such as fatigue and weakness.
and disrespectful acts in their children (e.g., Weisz et al., 2003). Children are explicitly taught to be polite and deferential and to inhibit any expression of anger. This raises interesting questions about whether childhood problems stemming from undercon- trolled behavior are lower in Thailand than in the United States, where such behavior seems to be tolerated to a greater extent. It also raises the question of whether problems related to   overcontrolled behavior   such as shyness, anxiety, and depression would be overrep- resented in Thailand relative to the United States. Two cross-national studies (Weisz et al., 1987, 1993) con- firmed that Thai children and adolescents do indeed have a greater prevalence of overcontrolled problems than do American children. Although there were no differences in the rate of undercon- trolled behavior problems between the two countries, there were differences in the kinds of undercontrolled behavior problems reported. For example, Thai adolescents had higher scores than American adolescents on indirect and subtle forms of under- control not involving interpersonal aggression such as having difficulty concentrating or being cruel to animals; American adolescents, on the other hand, had higher scores than Thai ado- lescents on behaviors like fighting, bullying, and disobeying at school (Weisz et al., 1993). In addition, these investigators found that Thai and American parents differ a good deal in which problems they will bring for treatment. In general, Thai parents seem less likely than American parents to refer their children for psychological treatment (Weisz & Weiss, 1991; Weisz et al., 1997). This may be in part because of their Buddhist belief in the transience of problems and their optimism that their child’s behavior will improve. Alternatively, Thai parents may not refer their children with undercontrolled problems for treatment sim- ply because these problems are so unacceptable that the parents are embarrassed to go public with them (Weisz et al., 1997). Cultural differences in psychopathology may also result from differences in what cultures consider to be the ideal kinds of parent–child attachment relationships. The World Around Us box on page 95 discusses research on cultural differences in what Japanese and Western cultures believe to be the nature of ideal versus disordered attachment relationships.  in review  •   Give some examples of universal and culture-specific symptoms of disorders.  •   What cultural factors help account for differences in problems involving overcontrolled and undercontrolled behavior in Thai versus American children?  •   Briefly describe three examples of culture-bound syndromes.  Sociocultural Causal Factors  We all receive a sociocultural inheritance that is the end prod- uct of thousands of years of social evolution, just as we receive a genetic inheritance that is the end product of millions of years of biological evolution. Because each sociocultural group fosters its own cultural patterns by systematically teaching its offspring, all its members tend to be somewhat alike. Children reared among headhunters tend to become headhunters; children reared in soci- eties that do not sanction violence usually learn to settle their dif- ferences in nonviolent ways. The more uniform and thorough the education of the younger members of a group, the more alike they will become. Thus, in a society characterized by a limited and con- sistent point of view, there are not the wide individual differences that are typical in a society like ours, where children have contact with diverse, often conflicting beliefs. Even in our society, however, there are certain core values that most of us consider essential. There are many sources of pathogenic social influences (see Figure 3.14). Some of these stem from socioeconomic factors.  In Thailand, children tend to exhibit   overcontrolled behavior   and are explicitly taught by their parents to be polite and deferential and to inhibit any expression of anger. This is in contrast to American children, whose parents tend to tolerate undercontrolled behavior to a greater extent.  •   Low socioeconomic status and unemployment  •   Prejudice and discrimination in race, gender, and ethnicity  •   Social change and uncertainty  •   Urban stressors: Violence and homelessness  figure   3.14  Sociocultural Causal Factors.
Others stem from sociocultural factors regarding role expecta- tions and from the destructive forces of prejudice and discrimi- nation. We will briefly look at some of the more important ones here.  low Socioeconomic Status and unemployment  In our society the lower the socioeconomic class, the higher the incidence of mental and physical disorders (e.g., Caracci & Mezzich, 2001; Conger & Donnellan, 2007). The strength of this inverse correlation varies with different types of mental disorder, however. For example, antisocial personality disorder is strongly related to socioeconomic status (SES), occurring about three times as often in the lowest income category as in the highest income category, whereas depressive disorders occur only about 1.5 times as often in the lowest income category as in the highest income category (Kessler et al., 1994; Kessler & Zhao, 1999; see also Monroe et al., 2009). There are many reasons for this general inverse relation- ship (Conger & Donnellan, 2007). There is evidence that some people with mental disorders slide down to the lower rungs of the economic ladder and remain there, sometimes because they do not have the economic or personal resources to climb back up (e.g., Gottesman, 1991) and sometimes because of prejudice and stigma against those with mental illness (e.g., Caracci & Mezzich, 2001). At the same time, more affluent people are better able to get prompt help or to conceal their problems. However, it is also true that, on average, people who live in poverty encounter more—and more severe—stressors in their lives, than do more affluent people, and they usually have fewer resources for dealing with them (e.g., Twenge & Campbell, 2002). Thus lower socioeconomic groups may show increased prevalence of mental and physical disorders due at least partly to increased stress on the people at risk (Conger & Donnellan, 2007; Eaton & Muntaner, 1999; Monroe et al., 2009). Children and adolescents from lower-SES families also tend to have more problems (see Conger & Donnellan, 2007, for a review). A number of studies have documented a strong relationship between the parents’ poverty and lower IQs in their children at least up to age 5. Persistent poverty has the most adverse effects (Duncan et al., 1994; McLoyd, 1998), including greater mental distress as well as greater risk taking and affiliating with deviant peers (Sampson et al., 2002). Children from low-SES fami- lies who were assessed when they were in preschool showed more acting-out and aggressive behaviors over the next 4 years (Dodge et al., 1994), perhaps in part because their parents are more likely to have an authoritarian parenting style and to experience marital conflict (Conger & Donnellan, 2007). Nevertheless, many inner- city children from high-risk socioeconomic backgrounds do very well, especially those with higher IQs and those with adequate rela- tionships at home, in school, and with peers (Felsman & Valliant, 1987; Long & Valliant, 1984; Masten & Coatsworth, 1995). Other studies have examined the effects of unemploy- ment per se on adults and children. Since the 1970s, there have been a number of severe economic recessions experi- enced worldwide, and significant rates of unemployment have accompanied each. Studies have repeatedly found unemployment—with its financial hardships, self-devaluation, and emotional distress—to be associated with emotional dis- tress and enhanced vulnerability to psychopathology (e.g., Dooley et al., 2000; Grzywacz & Dooley, 2003). Recent evi- dence suggests that it is the financial difficulties often resulting from unemployment that lead to the elevated levels of distress and mental disorders (Thomas et al., 2007). In particular, rates of depression, marital problems, and somatic (bodily) complaints increase during periods of unem- ployment but usually normalize when employment rates recover (Dew et al., 1991; Jones, 1992; Murphy & Athanasou, 1999). It is not simply that people who are mentally unstable tend to lose their jobs. These effects occur even when mental health status before unemployment is taken into account. Not surpris- ingly, the wives of unemployed men are also adversely affected, exhibiting higher levels of anxiety, depression, and hostility, which seem to be at least partially caused by the distress of the unemployed husband (Dew et al., 1987). Children too can be seriously affected. In the worst cases, unemployed fathers are much more likely to engage in child abuse (Cicchetti & Lynch, 1995; Dew et al., 1991). Finally, economic crises since 1990 have centered not only on unemployment but also on the effects that corporate restruc- turing and downsizing have had on upper-middle-class people, many of whom find themselves having to look for jobs requiring lower skills and paying much lower incomes than they earned in the past. In other cases people are forced to work only part time and often do not make enough to live on. In such cases of underemployment (or inadequate employment), several large studies of people who were underemployed found that rates of depression were comparable or nearly comparable to those seen in unemployed individuals (Dooley & Prause, 2004; Dooley et al., 2000; Grzywacz & Dooley, 2003).  Prejudice and Discrimination in race, Gender, and ethnicity  Vast numbers of people in our society have been subjected to demoralizing stereotypes as well as to both overt and covert dis- crimination in areas such as employment, education, and housing. We have made progress in race relations since the 1960s, but the lingering effects of mistrust and discomfort among various ethnic and racial groups can be clearly observed in many places (e.g., Eagly, 2004; Mays, Cochran, & Barnes, 2007). For example, on most college campuses, many students socialize informally only with members of their own subcultures, despite the attempts of many well-meaning college administrators to break down the barriers. These tendencies needlessly limit students’ educational experiences and probably contribute to continued misinformation about, and prejudice toward, others. There are also very large health disparities between African Americans and Caucasian Americans
that may at least in part be a result of various forms of discrimina- tion (Mays et al., 2007). Perceived discrimination seems to predict lower levels of well-being for women on dimensions relating to a sense of growth, autonomy, and self-acceptance (Ryff et al., 2003). Prejudice against minority groups may also explain why these groups sometimes show increased prevalence of certain mental dis- orders such as depression (Cohler et al., 1995; Kessler et al., 1994). One possible reason for this is that perceived discrimination may serve as a stressor that threatens self-esteem, which in turn increases psychological distress (e.g., Cassidy et al., 2004). A recent study of Arab and Muslim Americans two years after the bombing of the World Trade Center in New York found increased psychological distress, lower levels of happiness, and increased health problems in those who had experienced personal or familial prejudice, discrimi- nation, or violence since the World Trade Center disaster (Padela & Heisler, 2010). Finally, another study showed that African Ameri- can men who experience and perceive high levels of racial discrimi- nation are more likely to report involvement in both street violence and intimate partner violence (Reed et al., 2010). We have made progress in recognizing the demeaning and often disabling social roles our society has historically assigned to women. Again, though, much remains to be done. Many more women than men suffer from certain emotional disorders, most notably depression and anxiety disorders, which are two of the three most common categories of disorders (Blehar, 2006). This may be at least partly a consequence of the vulnerabilities (such as passivity and dependence) intrinsic to the traditional roles assigned to women and of the sexual discrimination that still occurs in the workplace (Eagly & Carli, 2007). There are two primary types of discrimination that occur in the workplace:  access discrimination , wherein women are not hired because they are women, and   treatment discrimination , wherein women who have a job are paid less and receive fewer opportunities for pro- motion (Eagly & Carli, 2007; Eagly & Karau, 2002). Sexual harassment in the workplace is another type of stress that women may experience. In addition, the special stressors with which many modern women must cope (being full-time mothers, full- time homemakers, and full-time employees) as their traditional roles rapidly change have also been implicated in higher rates of depression, anxiety, and marital dissatisfaction in women than in the past. This is especially true if a woman works long hours (over 40 hours a week), has a higher income than her husband, and has children at home. However, it should also be noted that under at least some circumstances, working outside the home has also been shown to be a protective factor against depression and marital dis- satisfaction (e.g., Brown & Harris, 1978; Helgeson, 2002).  the WoRlD around us  Culture and Attachment Relationships  R ecently, research has shown that there are significant cross-cultural differences in views of ideal parent–child attachment relationships. Accordingly, there are different views of what constitutes disordered attachment relationships that can increase risk for psychopathology. Views on the function of good attachment relationships (and the nature of disordered attachment) in Western cultures have been found to differ rather dramatically from those seen in Japan (Rothbaum, Weisz, et al., 2000, 2001). In Western societies, secure attachment relation- ships are thought to occur when a mother responds in a sensitive fashion to a child’s signals (e.g., signs of hunger or discomfort) yet gradually allows the child to explore the environment and develop some autonomy. In the United States one study found that teachers similarly prefer to respond to explicit expression of needs and to foster children’s independence and self-expression, which would also foster secure attachments (Rothbaum et al., 2006). Importantly, securely attached children (relative to inse- curely attached children) are thought to be less anxious and de- pressed, better able to cope with negative emotional states, and better able to form close relationships with peers. However, in Japan, parents’ goals are to anticipate all the child’s needs and thereby avoid any exposure to stress such as hunger or discomfort and to foster dependency (Rothbaum, Weisz, et al., 2000, 2001). Recent findings suggest that Japanese teachers also prefer to anticipate their students’ needs and to foster dependency on other tasks (Rothbaum et al., 2006). Accordingly, children who are considered securely attached in Japan are very dependent on their mothers (and teachers), and independent children are thought to have dis- turbed attachments. Moreover, because the Japanese value social harmony, children who are dependent and emotionally restrained and who express their feelings only indirectly are the ones viewed as competent; they also tend to be self-critical and self-effacing. This is very different from Western cultures, where children who show exploration and autonomy and are willing to express strong feelings and even disagreement openly are considered to be socially competent. Such children in Western cultures also tend to have positive self-views (Rothbaum, Weisz, et al., 2000). Given such differences, it is not surprising that different clinical interventions are viewed as appropriate for children with be- havior problems in these two cultures. For example, American therapists often help their clients to develop their own separate identities and assume that expression of negative feelings to- ward others (including parents) may be necessary. By contrast, Japanese therapists are more likely to encourage clients to be grateful to others (especially their parents) and encourage de- votion (see Rothbaum, Weisz, et al., 2000, 2001).
Social Change and uncertainty  The rate and pervasiveness of change today are different from anything our ancestors ever experienced. All aspects of our lives are affected—our education, our jobs, our families, our health, our leisure pursuits, our finances, and our beliefs and values. Constantly trying to keep up with the numerous adjustments demanded by these changes is a source of considerable stress. Simultaneously, we confront inevitable crises as the earth’s con- sumable natural resources dwindle, as our environment becomes increasingly noxious with pollutants, and as global warming occurs. No longer are Americans confident that the future will be better than the past or that technology will solve all our problems. On the contrary, our attempts to cope with existing problems seem increasingly to create new problems that are as bad or worse. The resulting despair, demoralization, and sense of helplessness are well-established predisposing conditions for abnormal reactions to stressful events (Dohrenwend, 2000; Selig- man, 1990, 1998). This sense of helplessness was also exacer- bated for Americans by the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center in New York and the Pentagon, with many people now living under increased worry and uncertainty over the possibility of terrorist attacks. Yet in other parts of the world, such as Israel and Palestine, people have lived with this uncertainty and worry over terrorist attacks for decades.  urban Stressors: Violence and Homelessness  Rapid urban growth is occurring worldwide—especially in less developed countries. Unfortunately, it is frequently unregulated and chaotic, and growing numbers of people are unemployed, homeless, or involved with illicit activities (Caracci, 2006). Perhaps not surprisingly, these areas are also plagued by a high prevalence of mental disorders. Moreover, vast numbers of people in the big cities of both developed and developing countries are direct or second-hand victims of   urban violence   (Caracci, 2006; Caracci & Mezzich, 2001). More than a decade ago it was esti- mated that at least 3.5 million people worldwide lose their lives to violence each year (World Health Organization, 1999), and there is no reason to think this number has declined. Domestic violence against women and children is especially widespread (e.g., Caracci, 2003). Such violence takes its toll on the victims not only in the areas of medical care and lost productivity but also in increased rates of anxiety, posttraumatic stress disorder, depres- sion, and suicidality (e.g., Caracci, 2006; Caracci & Mezzich, 2001). One recent study of young African American mothers exposed to violence found not only increased levels of depression but also elevated levels of aggressive behavior and harsh discipline of their children (Lewin et al., 2010). Another severe stress in urban areas worldwide is   homeless- ness , which has been rapidly growing for the past few decades. Estimates are that approximately one-third of homeless people are affected by severe mental illness, but many people who are not mentally ill also become homeless because they are victims of violence or poverty (e.g., Caracci & Mezzich, 2001). Needless to say, the major stressors experienced by being homeless create mental distress including anxiety, depression, suicidality, and physical illness, even in those who started out healthy.  The Impact of the Sociocultural Viewpoint  With our increased understanding of sociocultural influences on mental health, what was previously an almost exclusive concern with individuals has broadened to include a concern with societal, communal, familial, and other group settings as factors in mental disorders. Sociocultural research has led to programs designed to improve the social conditions that foster maladaptive behavior and mental disorder, and to community facilities for the early detection, treatment, and long-range prevention of mental disorder. In  7 we will examine some clinical facilities and other programs—both governmen- tal and private—that have been established as a result of com- munity efforts. There is strong evidence of cultural influences on abnormal behavior, and this area of research may yet answer many questions about the origins and courses of behavior problems as well as their treatment (Cohler et al., 1995; Miranda et al., 2005; Sue, 1999). Nevertheless, in spite of increasing research showing that patients may do better when treated by therapists from their own ethnic group (or at least by someone familiar with the patient’s culture),  Today many major metropolitan areas in the United States have prob- lems with gangs and urban violence.
many professionals may fail to adopt an appropriate cultural per- spective when dealing with mental illness. Instead, many simply assume that the treatments that have been shown to be useful with one culture will fare as well with other cultures, when in fact this is always an empirical question (e.g., Lam & Sue, 2001; Miranda et al., 2005; Sue, 1998). In a world of instant communication with people from any country, it is crucial for our sciences and professions to take a worldview.  in review  •   What effects do low SES and unemployment have on adults and children?  •   Describe how prejudice and discrimination, social change and uncertainty, and urban stress can have adverse effects on the development of abnormal behavior.  •   Why is it necessary to acknowledge the role of sociocultural fac- tors in mental disorders?  unResolveD issues  Theoretical Viewpoints and the Causes of Abnormal Behavior  T he viewpoints described in this chapter are theoretical constructions devised to orient psychologists in the study of abnormal behavior. As a set of hypothetical guide- lines, each viewpoint emphasizes the importance and integrity of its own position to the exclusion of other explanations. Most psychodynamically oriented clinicians, for example, value those traditional writings and beliefs consistent with Freudian or later psychodynamic theories, and they minimize or ignore the teach- ings of opposing viewpoints. They usually adhere to prescribed practices of psychodynamic therapy and do not use other meth- ods such as exposure therapy.  ADVANTAGeS oF HAVING A THeoreTICAl VIewPoINT  Theoretical integrity and adherence to a systematic viewpoint have a key advantage: They ensure a consistent approach to one’s practice or research efforts. Once mastered, the methodology can guide a practitioner or researcher through the complex web of human problems. But such adherence to a theory has its disad- vantages. By excluding other possible explanations, it can blind re- searchers to other factors that may be equally important. The fact is that none of the theories devised to date addresses the whole spectrum of abnormality—each is limited in some way in its focus. Two general trends have occurred as a result. First, the original model or theory may be revised by expanding or modifying some elements of the system. The many examples of such modi- fied interpretations include Adler’s and Erikson’s modifications of Freudian theory and the more recent cognitive-behavioral ap- proach’s modification of behavior therapy. But many of the early Freudian theorists did not accept the neo-Freudian additions, and some classical behavior therapists today still do not accept the revisions proposed by cognitive behaviorists. Therefore, the second trend has been for theoretical viewpoints to multiply and coexist—each with its own proponents—rather than being as- similated into previous views.  THe eCleCTIC APProACH  Alternatively, aspects of two or more diverse approaches may be combined in a more general, eclectic approach. In practice, many psychologists have responded to the exis- tence of many perspectives by adopting an eclectic stance; that is, they accept working ideas from several viewpoints and incorporate whichever they find useful. For example, a psychologist using an eclectic approach might accept causal explanations from psychodynamic theory while applying tech- niques of anxiety reduction from behavior therapy. Another psychologist might combine techniques from the cognitive- behavioral approach with those from the interpersonal ap- proach. Purists in the field—those who advocate a single viewpoint—are skeptical about eclecticism, claiming that the eclectic approach tends to lack integrity and produces a “crazy quilt” of inconsistent practice with little rationale. This criticism may be true, but the approach certainly seems to work for many psychotherapists. Typically, those who use an eclectic approach to treatment make no attempt to synthesize the theoretical perspectives. Although this approach can work in practical settings, it is not successful at a theoretical level because the underlying principles of many of the theoretical perspectives are incompatible as they now stand. Thus the eclectic approach still falls short of the final goal, which is to tackle the theoretical clutter and develop a single, compre- hensive, internally consistent viewpoint that accurately reflects what we know empirically about abnormal behavior.  THe BIoPSyCHoSoCIAl uNIFIeD APProACH  At present, the only attempt at such a unified perspective that has been developing is called the   biopsychosocial viewpoint.  This viewpoint reflects the conviction that most disorders are the result of many causal factors—biological, psychological, and sociocultural—interacting with one another. Moreover, for any given person, the particular combination of causal factors may be unique, or at least not widely shared by large numbers of people with the same disorder. For example, some children may become delinquents primarily because of having a heavy genetic loading for antisocial behavior, whereas others may become delinquent primarily because of environmental influ- ences such as living in an area with a large number of gangs. Therefore, we can still hope to achieve a scientific under- standing of many of the causes of abnormal behavior even if we cannot predict such behavior with exact certainty in each individual case and are often left with some “unexplained” influences.
3.1   what are the causes and risk factors for abnormal behavior?  •   In considering the causes of abnormal behavior, it is important to distinguish among necessary, sufficient, and contributory causal factors, as well as between relatively distal causal factors and those that are more proximal.  •   Usually the occurrence of abnormal or maladaptive behavior is considered to be the joint product of a person’s predisposition or vulnerability (diathesis) to disorder and of certain stressors that challenge his or her coping resources.  •   The concept of protective factors is important for understanding why some people with both a diathesis and a stressor may remain resilient and not develop a disorder.  3.2   what viewpoints can we take to help us understand the causes of abnormal behavior?  •   Both the distal (long-ago) and proximal (immediate) risk factors for mental disorder may involve biological, psychological, and sociocultural factors. These three classes of factors can interact with each other in complicated ways during the development of mental disorders.  •   This chapter discusses biological, psychological, and sociocultural viewpoints, each of which tends to emphasize the importance of causal factors of a characteristic type. Ultimately we strive for an integrative biopsychosocial viewpoint.  3.3   what does the biological viewpoint tell us about abnor- mal behavior and what are the biological causal factors of abnormal behavior?  •   In examining biologically based vulnerabilities, we must consider abnormalities in neurochemical and hormonal systems, genetic vul- nerabilities, temperament, and brain dysfunction and neural plasticity.  •   Many different neurotransmitter and hormonal abnormalities contribute to the development of mental disorders because of the effects they exert on different relevant brain and body areas for different disorders.  •   Genetic vulnerabilities can affect the development of mental disorders through multiple mechanisms, including ways in which the genotype may affect the phenotype (genotype–environment correlations) and in which they affect an individual’s suscep- tibility to environmental influences (genotype–environment interactions).  •   Methods for studying the extent of genetic versus environ- mental influences include the family history method, the twin method, and the adoption method. More recently, linkage analysis and association studies are beginning to contribute knowledge about the exact location of genes contributing to mental disorders.  •   Temperament is strongly influenced by genetic factors and refers to a baby’s characteristic ways of reacting to the environment and his or her ways of self-regulation. It forms the basis of our adult personality, which in turn influences our vulnerability to different disorders.  •   Studies of neural plasticity have shown that genetic programs for brain development are not as fixed as once believed and that existing neural circuits can often be modified based on experience.  3.4   what are the psychological viewpoints on abnormal psychology?  •   In examining psychologically based vulnerabilities, there are three primary perspectives that have developed since the end of the nineteenth century: psychodynamic, behavioral, and cognitive- behavioral.  •   The oldest psychological viewpoint on abnormal behavior is Freudian psychoanalytic theory. For many years this view was preoccupied with questions about libidinal (id) energies and their containment.  •   More recently, four second-generation psychodynamic theories departed in significant ways from Freud’s original ideas.  •   Anna Freud’s ego psychology focused on the important role of the ego in normal and abnormal behavior, with special attention focused on ego-defense reactions.  •   Object-relations theorists focused on the role of the quality of very early (pre-Oedipal) mother–infant relationships for normal development.  •   The originators of the interpersonal perspective took exception to the Freudian emphasis on the internal determinants of motiva- tion and behavior and instead emphasized the social and cultural forces that shape behavior.  •   Attachment theory, which has roots in both the interpersonal and object-relations perspectives, emphasizes the importance of early experiences with attachment relationships for laying the foundation for later child, adolescent, and adult development.  •   Psychoanalysis and closely related therapeutic approaches are termed   psychodynamic   in recognition of their attention to inner, often unconscious forces.  •   The behavioral perspective focuses on the role of learning in human behavior and attributes maladaptive behavior either to a failure to learn appropriate behaviors or to the learning of mal- adaptive behaviors.  •   The primary forms of learning studied are classical condition- ing and instrumental (operant) learning. The effects of each are modified by principles of generalization and discrimination. Observational learning is also important.  •   Adherents of the behavioral viewpoint attempt to alter maladap- tive behavior by extinguishing it or providing training in new, more adaptive behaviors.  •   The cognitive-behavioral viewpoint attempts to incorpo- rate the complexities of human cognition, and how it can become distorted, into an understanding of the causes of psychopathology.  3   summary
•   People’s schemas and self-schemas play a central role in the way they process information, in how they attribute outcomes to causes, and in their values. The efficiency, accuracy, and coher- ence of a person’s schemas and self-schemas and attributions appear to provide an important protection against breakdown.  •   Treatments developed from the cognitive-behavioral perspective attempt to alter maladaptive thinking and improve a person’s abilities to solve problems and to achieve goals.  3.5   what are the psychological causal factors behind abnor- mal behavior?  •   Sources of psychologically determined vulnerability include early social deprivation or severe emotional trauma, inadequate par- enting styles, marital discord and divorce, and maladaptive peer relationships.  3.6   How does the sociocultural viewpoint help us understand abnormal behavior?  •   The sociocultural viewpoint is concerned with the contribution of sociocultural variables to mental disorder.  •   Although many serious mental disorders are fairly universal, the form that some disorders take and their prevalence vary widely among different cultures.  3.7   What are the sociocultural causal factors of abnormal behavior?  •   Low socioeconomic status and unemployment; being subjected to prejudice and discrimination in race, gender, and ethnicity; experiencing social change and uncertainty; and urban violence and homelessness are all associated with greater risk for various disorders.  •   The biopsychosocial approach is promising, but in many ways it is merely a descriptive acknowledgment of the complex interactions among biological, psychological, and sociocultural risk factors rather than a clearly articulated theory of how they interact.  key terms  adoption method   65  association studies   67  attachment theory   74  attribution   81  behavior genetics   65  biopsychosocial viewpoint   60  castration anxiety   72  chromosomes   63  classical conditioning   75  cognitive-behavioral perspective   79  concordance rate   65  contributory cause   56  cortisol   62  developmental psychopathology   59  developmental systems approach   69  diathesis   57  diathesis-stress models   57  discrimination   78  ego   71  ego psychology   73  ego-defense mechanisms   71  electra complex   72  etiology   55  extinction   76  family history method   65  generalization   78  genes   63  genotype   64  genotype–environment correlation   64  genotype–environment interaction   64  Hikikomori   92  hormones   62  hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA axis)   62  id   70  instrumental (operant) conditioning   76  interpersonal perspective   74  intrapsychic conflicts   71  learning   75  libido   70  linkage analysis   67  necessary cause   55  neurotransmitters   60  object-relations theory   73  observational learning   78  oedipus complex   72  phenotype   64  pituitary gland   62  pleasure principle   70  polygenic   63  primary process thinking   70  protective factors   57  psychosexual stages of development   71  reality principle   71  reinforcement   76  resilience   58  schema   79  secondary process thinking   71  self-schema   80  spontaneous recovery   76  stress   57  sufficient cause   55  superego   71  synapse   60  temperament   67  twin method   65  zar   92
learning objectives  4.1  What are the basic elements in assessment?  4.2  What is involved in the assessment of the physical organism?  4.3  What is psychosocial assessment?  4.4  How do practitioners integrate assessment data?  4.5  What is the process for classifying abnormal behavior?  The assessment of the personality and motivation of others has been of interest to people since antiquity. Early records show that some individuals used assessment methods to evaluate po- tential personality problems or behaviors. There are documented attempts at understanding personality characteristics in ancient civilizations. Hathaway (1965) points out that one of the earliest descriptions of using behavioral observation in assessing person- ality can be found in the Old Testament. Gideon relied upon observations of his men who trembled with fear to consider them fit for duty; Gideon also observed how soldiers chose to drink water from a stream as a means of selecting effective soldiers for battle. In ancient Rome, Tacitus provided examples in which the appraisal of a person’s personality entered into their leader’s judgments about them. Tacitus (translated by Grant, 1956, p. 36) points out that Emperor Tiberius evaluated his subordi- nates in his meetings by often pretending to be hesitant in order to detect what the leading men were thinking. Psychological assessment is one of the oldest and most widely developed branches of contemporary psychology, dating back to the work of Galton (1879) in the nineteenth century (Butcher, 2010; Weiner & Greene, 2008). We will focus in this chapter on the initial clinical assessment and on arriving at a clinical diagnosis according to   DSM-5 .   Psychological assessment   refers to a pro- cedure by which clinicians, using psychological tests, observation, and interviews, develop a summary of the client’s symptoms and problems.   Clinical diagnosis   is the process through which a clini- cian arrives at a general “summary classification” of the patient’s symptoms by following a clearly defined system such as   DSM-5   or ICD-10 (International Classification of Diseases), the latter pub- lished by the World Health Organization. Assessment is an ongoing process and may be important at various points during treatment, not just at the beginning—for example, to examine the client’s progress in treatment or to evaluate outcome. In the initial clinical assessment, an attempt is usually made to identify the main dimensions of a client’s problem and to predict the probable course of events under various conditions. It is at this initial stage that crucial decisions have to be made—such as what (if any) treatment approach is to be offered, whether the problem will require hospitaliza- tion, to what extent family members will need to be included as coclients, and so on. Sometimes these decisions must be made quickly, as in emergency conditions, and without critical infor- mation. As will be seen, various psychological measurement instruments are employed to maximize assessment efficiency in this type of pretreatment examination process (Harwood & Beutler, 2009). A less obvious, but equally important, function of pretreat- ment assessment is establishing baselines for various psychologi- cal functions so that the effects of treatment can be measured. Criteria based on these measurements may be established as part of the treatment plan such that the therapy is considered suc- cessful and is terminated only when the client’s behavior meets these predetermined criteria. Also, as we will see in later chap- ters, comparison of posttreatment with pretreatment assessment results is an essential feature of many research projects designed to evaluate the effectiveness of various therapies. In this chapter, we will review some of the more commonly used assessment procedures and show how the data obtained can be integrated into a coherent clinical picture for making decisions about referral and treatment. Our survey will include a discussion of physical, neurological, and neuropsychological assessment; the clinical interview; behavioral observation; and personality assessment through the use of projective and objec- tive psychological tests. Later in this chapter we will examine the process of arriving at a clinical diagnosis using   DSM-5 . Let us look first at what, exactly, a clinician is trying to learn during the psychological assessment of a client.  The Basic Elements in Assessment  What does a clinician need to know? First, of course, the   pre- senting problem , or major symptoms and behavior the client is experiencing, must be identified. Is it a situational problem precipitated by some environmental stressor such as divorce or unemployment, a manifestation of a more pervasive and long-term disorder, or some combination of the two? Is there any evidence of recent deterioration in cognitive functioning? What is the duration of the current complaint, and how is the person dealing with the problem? What, if any, prior help has been sought? Are there indications of self-defeating behavior and personality deterioration, or is the individual using available per- sonal and environmental resources in a good effort to cope? How pervasively has the problem affected the person’s performance of  4
important social roles? Does the individual’s symptomatic behav- ior fit any of the diagnostic patterns in the   DSM-5 ?  The Relationship Between Assessment and Diagnosis  It is important to have an adequate classification of the present- ing problem for a number of reasons. Clinically, knowledge of a person’s type of disorder can help in planning and managing the appropriate treatment. Administratively, it is essential to know the range of diagnostic problems that are represented in the cli- ent population and for which treatment facilities need to be available. If most clients at a facility have been diagnosed as hav- ing personality disorders, for example, then the staffing, physi- cal environment, and treatment facilities should be arranged accordingly, for example, with appropriate security and clearly established rules. In many cases, a formal diagnosis is necessary before insurance claims can be filed to cover the client’s treat- ment costs. Thus the nature of the difficulty needs to be under- stood as clearly as possible, including a diagnostic categorization if appropriate (see the section “Classifying Abnormal Behavior” at the end of this chapter).  Taking a Social or Behavioral History  For most clinical purposes, assigning a formal diagnostic clas- sification per se is much less important than having a clear understanding of the individual’s behavioral history, intellectual functioning, personality characteristics, and environmental pres- sures and resources. That is, an adequate assessment includes much more than the diagnostic label. For example, it should include an objective description of the person’s behavior. How does the person characteristically respond to other people? Are there excesses in behavior present, such as eating or drinking too much? Are there notable deficits, for example, in social skills? How appropriate is the person’s behavior? Is the person mani- festing behavior that is plainly unresponsive or uncooperative? Excesses, deficits, and appropriateness are key dimensions to be noted if the clinician is to understand the particular disorder that has brought the individual to the clinic or hospital.  PeRSonAliTy FAcToRS   Assessment should include a descrip- tion of any relevant long-term personality characteristics. Has the person typically responded in deviant ways to particular kinds of situations—for example, those requiring submission to legitimate authority? Are there personality traits or behavior patterns that predispose the individual to behave in maladaptive ways? Does the person tend to become enmeshed with others to the point of losing his or her identity, or is he or she so self-absorbed that in- timate relationships are not possible? Is the person able to accept help from others? Is the person capable of genuine affection and of accepting appropriate responsibility for the welfare of others? Such questions are at the heart of many assessment efforts.  THe SociAl conTexT   It is also important to assess the social context in which the individual functions. What kinds of envi- ronmental demands are typically placed on the person, and what supports or special stressors exist in her or his life situation? For example, being the primary caretaker for a spouse suffering from Alzheimer’s disease is so challenging that relatively few people can manage the task without significant psychological impair- ment, especially where outside supports are lacking. The diverse and often conflicting bits of information about the individual’s personality traits, behavior patterns, environ- mental demands, and so on must then be integrated into a consistent and meaningful picture. Some clinicians refer to this picture as a “dynamic formulation” because it not only describes the current situation but also includes hypotheses about what is driving the person to behave in maladaptive ways. At this point in the assessment, the clinician should have a plausible explanation for why a normally passive and mild-mannered man suddenly flew into a rage and started breaking up furniture, for example. The formulation should allow the clinician to develop hypotheses about the client’s future behavior as well. What is the likelihood of improvement or deterioration if the person’s problems are left untreated? Which behaviors should be the ini- tial focus of change, and what treatment methods are likely to be most efficient in producing this change? How much change might be expected from a particular type of treatment? Where feasible, decisions about treatment are made collabora- tively with the consent and approval of the individual. In cases of severe disorder, however, they may have to be made without the client’s participation or, in rare instances, even without consult- ing responsible family members. As has already been indicated, knowledge of the person’s strengths and resources is important; in short, what qualities does the client bring to treatment that can enhance the chances of improvement? Because a wide range of factors can play important roles in causing and maintaining mal- adaptive behavior, assessment may involve the coordinated use of physical, psychological, and environmental assessment procedures. As we have indicated, however, the nature and comprehensiveness  Some patients with cognitive deterioration are difficult to evaluate and to provide health care for, often requiring special facilities.
of clinical assessments vary with the problem and the treatment agency’s facilities. Assessment by phone in a suicide prevention center (Stolberg & Bongar, 2009), for example, is quite different from assessment aimed at developing a treatment plan for a person who has come to a clinic for help (Perry, 2009).  ensuring culturally Sensitive Assessment Procedures  Increasingly, practitioners are being asked to conduct psychologi- cal evaluations with clients from diverse ethnic and language backgrounds. In both clinical and court settings, for example, a psychologist might be referred a client who has limited English language skills and low exposure to American mores, values, and laws. It is critical for the psychologist to be informed of the issues involved in multicultural assessment (often referred to as   cultural competence ) and to use testing procedures that have been adapted and validated for culturally diverse clients (Hays, 2008; Hunter et al., 2009). Psychological assessment of clients from diverse ethnic back- grounds has increased greatly in recent years. The growing num- ber of minorities requiring a clinical or forensic evaluation comes about, in part, from the influx of immigrants or refugees, many of whom encounter adjustment difficulties. The U.S. Census Bureau (2011) reports that the Hispanic population now makes up 16 percent of the U.S. population. People of Hispanic origin are now the largest ethnic minority group in the United States. African Americans now represent 12.9 percent of the popula- tion, Asians 4.5 percent, Native Americans 1.0 percent, and Native Hawaiians/Pacific Islanders less than 0.1 percent. Many immigrants, especially those of color, become members of ethnic minorities when they relocate to North America. They may thus experience racial discrimination or may be further viewed as infe- rior by the nonminority community due to their lack of political power or lack of adaptive skills arising from their difficulties in acculturation (Green, 2009; Hays, 2008). In order to fairly and successfully treat such individuals, the ethics code of the American Psychological Association (APA, 2002) recommends that psychologists consider various test factors, test-taking abilities, and other characteristics of the person being assessed, such as situational, linguistic, and cultural differ- ences, that might affect his or her judgments or reduce the accu- racy of his or her interpretations. Thus, psychologists who use tests in a culturally competent manner must bear in mind a range of issues and factors involved with culturally and linguistically diverse clients. These issues involve the importance of ensuring that the characteristics of the test being employed are appropriate across cultures and that potential biasing factors do not interfere with critical thinking in the overall assessment process. The challenges of understanding clients in multicultural assessment have been described (Butcher, Tsai, et al., 2006; Hays, 2008) and involve both test instrument characteristics and socio- cultural factors such as the relationships among culture, behavior, and psychopathology. Psychologists need to ensure that the test procedures they employ are appropriate for the particular client. For example, the psychological equivalence of the test for use with the particular population should be determined. The mean- ing or cultural significance of test items should be similar across cultural groups (Butcher & Han, 1996), and the norms used to compare the client should be appropriate. In using Western- developed tests, users need to take into account the dominant language, socioeconomic status, ethnicity, and gender of their clients. For example, clients from non-English-speaking countries might have insufficient English language skills, which will influ- ence their test performance. When using a translated version of a test, interpreters need to be aware of the possible differences that can be obtained using an adapted version. Thus, it is important for psychologists to be aware of the available research on the instrument’s use with the target population in order to assess whether the adapted version measures the same variables in the new cultures. Finally, test users need to be concerned with the impact and fairness of the instruments they employ with clients from diverse groups—for example, whether there are any possible performance differences on the scales between groups. The most widely used personality measure, the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI-2) (to be discussed later in this chapter), has been widely evaluated both in interna- tional applications with translated versions (Butcher & Williams, 2009) and in diverse subcultural groups in the United States (Butcher et al., 2007). There are Spanish-language versions of the test. Recent research has provided support for the use of the MMPI-2 with minorities (Robin et al., 2003), and the analyses provided by Hall and colleagues (1999) support the use of the MMPI-2 with Hispanic clients.  The influence of Professional orientation  How clinicians go about the assessment process often depends on their basic treatment orientations. For example, a biologi- cally oriented clinician—typically a psychiatrist or other medical practitioner—is likely to focus on biological assessment methods aimed at determining any underlying organic malfunctioning that may be causing the maladaptive behavior. A psychodynamic or psychoanalytically oriented clinician may choose unstructured personality assessment techniques, such as the Rorschach inkblots or the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), to be described later in the chapter, to identify intrapsychic conflicts or may simply proceed with therapy, expecting these conflicts to emerge naturally as part of the treatment process. A behaviorally oriented clinician, in an effort to determine the functional relationships between environmental events or reinforcements and the abnormal behav- ior, will rely on such techniques as behavioral observation and self-monitoring to identify learned maladaptive patterns; for a cognitively oriented behaviorist, the focus would shift to the dys- functional thoughts supposedly mediating those patterns. The preceding examples represent general trends and are in no way meant to imply that clinicians of a particular orientation
limit themselves to a particular assessment method or that each assessment technique is limited to a particular theoretical orien- tation. Such trends are instead a matter of emphasis and point to the fact that certain types of assessments are more conducive than others to uncovering particular causal factors or for eliciting information about symptomatic behavior central to understand- ing and treating a disorder within a given conceptual framework. As you will see in what follows, both physical and psychoso- cial data can be extremely important to understanding the patient. In the sections that follow we will discuss several assessment instruments and examine in some detail an actual psychological study of a woman who experienced a traumatic situation in the workplace that resulted in severe emotional adjustment problems.  Reliability, Validity, and Standardization  Three measurement concepts that are important in understand- ing clinical assessment and the utility of psychological tests are reliability, validity, and standardization. These concepts, illustrated throughout this chapter, will be briefly described. A psychological test or measurement construct needs to show reli- ability in order to be effective.   Reliability   is a term describing the degree to which an assessment measure produces the same result each time it is used to evaluate the same thing. If, for example, your scale showed a significantly different weight each time you stepped on it over a brief period of time, you would consider it a fairly unreliable measure of your body mass. In the context of assessment or classification, reliability is an index of the extent to which a measurement instrument can agree that a person’s behavior fits a given diagnostic class. If the observations are dif- ferent, it may mean that the classification criteria are not precise enough to determine whether the suspected disorder is present. The psychological test or classification system must also be valid.   Validity   is the extent to which a measuring instrument actually measures what it is supposed to measure. In the con- text of testing or classification, validity is the degree to which a measure accurately conveys to us something clinically important about the person whose behavior fits the category, such as help- ing to predict the future course of the disorder. If, for example, a person is predicted to have or is diagnosed as having schizophre- nia, we should be able to infer the presence of some fairly precise characteristics that differentiate the person from individuals who are considered normal or from those with other types of mental disorder. The classification or diagnosis of schizophrenia, for example, implies a disorder of unusually stubborn persistence, with recurrent episodes being common. Normally, the validity of a mental health measure or clas- sification presupposes reliability. If clinicians can’t agree on the class to which a person with a disorder’s behavior belongs, then the question of the validity of the diagnostic classifications under consideration becomes irrelevant. To put it another way, if we can’t confidently pin down what the diagnosis is, then whatever useful information a given diagnosis might convey about the per- son being evaluated is lost. On the other hand, good reliability does not in itself guarantee validity. For example, handedness (left, right, ambidextrous) can be assessed with a high degree of reliability, but handedness accurately predicts neither mental health status nor countless other behavioral qualities on which people vary; that is, it is not a valid index of these qualities (although it may be a valid index for success in certain situa- tions involving the game of baseball, for example). In like man- ner, reliable assignment of a person’s behavior to a given class of mental disorder will prove useful only to the extent that the validity of that class has been established through research.  Standardization   is a process by which a psychological test is administered, scored, and interpreted in a consistent or “stan- dard” manner. Standardized tests are considered to be more fair in that they are applied consistently and in the same manner to all persons taking them. Many psychological tests are standard- ized to allow the test user to compare a particular individual’s score on the test with a reference population, often referred to as a normative sample. For example, comparing a particular individual’s test score on a distribution of test scores from a large normative population can enable the user to evaluate whether the individual’s score is low, average, or high along the distribu- tion of scores (referred to as a   T score distribution ).  Trust and Rapport Between the clinician and the client  In order for psychological assessment to proceed effectively and to provide a clear understanding of behavior and symptoms, the client being evaluated must feel comfortable with the clinician. In a clinical assessment situation, this means that a client must feel that the testing will help the practitioner gain a clear understand- ing of her or his problems and must understand how the tests will be used and how the psychologist will incorporate them into the clinical evaluation. The clinician should explain what will happen during assessment and how the information gathered will help provide a clearer picture of the problems the client is facing. Clients need to be assured that the feelings, beliefs, atti- tudes, and personal history that they are disclosing will be used appropriately, will be kept in strict confidence, and will be made available only to therapists or others involved in the case. An important aspect of confidentiality is that the test results are released to a third party only if the client signs an appropriate release form. In cases in which the person is being tested for a third party such as the court system, the client in effect is the referring source—the judge ordering the evaluation—not the individual being tested. In these cases the testing relationship is likely to be strained and developing rapport is likely to be dif- ficult. Of course, in a court-ordered evaluation, the person’s test- taking behavior is likely to be very different from what it would be otherwise, and interpretation of the test needs to reflect this different motivational set created by the person’s unwillingness to cooperate. People being tested in a clinical situation are usually highly motivated to be evaluated and like to know the results of the
testing. They generally are eager for some definition of their discomfort. Moreover, providing test feedback in a clinical setting can be an important element in the treatment process (Harwood & Beutler, 2009). Interestingly, when patients are given appropriate feedback on test results, they tend to improve—just from gaining a perspective on their problems from the testing. The test feedback process itself can be a powerful clinical intervention (Finn & Kamphuis, 2006; Finn & Tonsager, 1997). When persons who were not provided psychological test feedback were compared with those who were provided with feedback, the latter group showed a significant decline in reported symptoms and an increase in measured self-esteem as a result of having a clearer understanding of their own resources.  in review  •   What is the difference between clinical diagnosis and psycho- logical assessment? What components must be integrated into a dynamic formulation?  •   Describe the important elements in a social or behavioral history.  •   What does it mean to use culturally fair assessments?  •   What is the impact of professional orientation on the structure and form of a psychological evaluation?  •   Does providing test feedback to clients aid them in their adjustment?  Assessment of the Physical Organism  In some situations and with certain psychological problems, a medical evaluation is necessary to rule out the possibility that physical abnormalities may be causing or contributing to the problem. The medical evaluation may include both a general physical examination and special examinations aimed at assess- ing the structural (anatomical) and functional (physiological) integrity of the brain as a behaviorally significant physical system (Fatemi & Clayton, 2008).  The General Physical examination  In cases in which physical symptoms are part of the presenting clinical picture, a referral for a medical evaluation is recom- mended. A physical examination consists of the kinds of pro- cedures most of us have experienced when getting a “medical checkup.” Typically, a medical history is obtained, and the major systems of the body are checked (Fatemi & Clayton, 2008; LeBlond et al., 2004). This part of the assessment procedure is of obvious importance for disorders that entail physical problems, such as a psychologically based physical condition, addictive, and organic brain syndromes. In addition, a variety of organic conditions, including various hormonal irregularities, can pro- duce behavioral symptoms that closely mimic those of mental disorders usually considered to have predominantly psychoso- cial origins. Although some long-lasting pain can be related to actual organic conditions, other such pain can result from strictly emotional factors. A case in point is chronic back pain, in which psychological factors may sometimes play an important part. A diagnostic error in this type of situation could result in costly and ineffective surgery; hence, in equivocal cases, most clinicians insist on a medical clearance before initiating psychosocially based interventions.  The neurological examination  Because brain pathology is sometimes involved in some mental disorders (e.g., unusual memory deficits or motor impairments), a specialized neurological examination can be administered in addition to the general medical examination. This may involve the client’s getting an   electroencephalogram (EEG)   to assess brain wave patterns in awake and sleeping states. An EEG is a graphical record of the brain’s electrical activity (O’Sullivan et al., 2006). It is obtained by placing electrodes on the scalp and amplifying the minute brain wave impulses from various brain areas; these amplified impulses drive oscillating pens whose devi- ations are traced on a strip of paper moving at a constant speed. Much is known about the normal pattern of brain impulses in waking and sleeping states and under various conditions of sensory stimulation. Significant divergences from the normal pattern can thus reflect abnormalities of brain function such as might be caused by a brain tumor or other lesion. When an EEG reveals a   dysrhythmia , or irregular pattern, in the brain’s electrical activity (for example, recent research has supported a link between resting frontal EEG asymmetry and depression, see Stewart et al., 2010; and anxiety, see Thibodeau et al., 2006), other specialized techniques may be used in an attempt to arrive at a more precise diagnosis of the problem.  AnATomicAl BRAin ScAnS   Radiological technology, such as a   computerized axial tomography (CAT) scan , is one of these specialized techniques (Mishra & Singh, 2010). Through the use of X rays, a CAT scan reveals images of parts of the brain  An EEG is a graphical record of the brain’s electrical activity. Electrodes are placed on the scalp, and brain wave impulses are amplified. The am- plified impulses drive oscillating pens whose deviations are traced on a strip of paper moving at a constant speed. Significant differences from the normal pattern can reflect abnormalities of brain function.
that might be diseased. This procedure has aided neurological study in recent years by providing rapid access, without surgery, to accurate information about the localization and extent of anomalies in the brain’s structural characteristics. The procedure involves the use of computer analysis applied to X-ray beams across sections of a patient’s brain to produce images that a neu- rologist can then interpret. CAT scans have been increasingly replaced by   magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . The images of the interior of the brain are frequently sharper with MRI because of its superior ability to differentiate subtle variations in soft tissue. In addition, the MRI procedure is normally far less complicated to adminis- ter, and it does not subject the patient to ionizing radiation. Essentially, MRI involves the precise measurement of varia- tions in magnetic fields that are caused by the varying amounts of water content of various organs and parts of organs. In this manner the anatomical structure of a cross section at any given plane through an organ such as the brain can be computed and graphically depicted with astonishing structural differentiation and clarity. MRI thus makes possible, by noninvasive means, visualization of all but the most minute abnormalities of brain structure. It has been particularly useful in confirming degenera- tive brain processes as shown, for example, in enlarged areas of the brain. Therefore, MRI studies have considerable potential to illuminate the contribution of brain anomalies to nonorganic psychoses such as schizophrenia, and some progress in this area has already been made (Mathalondolf et al., 2001). Still, the MRI can be problematic. For example, some patients have a claustrophobic reaction to being placed into the narrow cylinder of the MRI machine that is necessary to contain the mag- netic field and block out external radio signals. In addition, a recent evaluation and critique of the MRI approach in medicine was pub- lished by Joyce (2008), who interviewed physicians and MRI tech- nologists and also conducted ethnographic research at imaging sites and attended radiology conferences. In her critique, she demon- strated that current beliefs about MRI draw on cultural ideas about technology and are reinforced by health care policies and insurance reimbursement practices. However, her review raises ques- tions about the work practices of many physicians and technologists and suggests that MRI scans do not reveal the truth about the body that many medical practices often hold. For example, she concludes that MRI studies do not always lead to better outcomes for patients.  PeT ScAnS: A meTABolic PoRTRAiT   Another scanning technique is the   positron emission tomog- raphy (PET) scan . Whereas a CAT scan is limited to distinguishing anatomical features such as the shape of a particular internal structure, a PET scan allows for an appraisal of how an organ is functioning (Kumano et al., 2007). The PET scan provides metabolic portraits by tracking natural compounds, such as glucose, as they are metabolized by the brain or other organs. By revealing areas of differential metabolic activity, the PET scan enables a medical specialist to obtain more clear-cut diagnoses of brain pathology by, for example, pinpointing sites responsible for epileptic seizures, trauma from head injury or stroke, and brain tumors. Thus the PET scan may be able to reveal problems that are not immediately apparent anatomically. Moreover, the use of PET scans in research on brain pathology that occurs in abnormal conditions such as Alzheimer’s disease may lead to important discoveries about the organic processes underlying these disorders and aid in the treatment of dementia (Saykin et al., 2006). PET scans have, however, been of somewhat lim- ited value thus far because of the low-fidelity pictures obtained (Fletcher, 2004; Videbech et al., 2003) and their cost, since they require a very expensive instrument nearby to produce the short- lived radioactive atoms required for the procedure.  THe FuncTionAl mRi   The technique known as   functional MRI (fMRI)   has been used in the study of psychopathology for a number of years. As originally developed and employed, the MRI could reveal brain structure but not brain activity. For the lat- ter, clinicians and investigators remained dependent upon PET scans. Improving on these techniques, fMRI most often measures changes in local oxygenation (i.e., blood flow) of specific areas of brain tissue that in turn depend on neuronal activity in those spe- cific regions (Bandettini, 2007). Ongoing psychological activity, such as sensations, images, and thoughts, can thus be “mapped,” at least in principle, revealing the specific areas of the brain that appear to be involved in their neurophysiological processes. For example, one study (Wright & Jackson, 2007) examined the task of judgment of serve direction among tennis players and found that different patterns produce different responses in the brain. Because the measurement of change in this context is criti- cally time dependent, the emergence of fMRI required the development of high-speed devices for enhancing the recording process, as well as the computerized analysis of incoming data. (See photo below.) These improvements are now widely avail- able and will likely lead to a marked increase in studying people  A pattern of increased activity in the anterior cingulated cortex (ACC) and the right ventral prefrontal cortex (RVPFC), shown here in persons who were excluded from par- ticipating in a game, are similar to cortical activity of persons experiencing physical pain.
with disorders using functional imaging. Optimism about the ultimate value of fMRI in mapping cognitive processes in mental disorders is still strong. The fMRI is thought by some to hold more promise for depicting brain abnormalities than currently used procedures such as the neuropsychological examination (see next section). A number of published studies have provided support for this optimism (MacDonald & Jones, 2009). Research using fMRI has explored the cortical functioning that underlies various psychological processes; for example, one recent study showed that psychological factors or environmental events can affect brain processes as measured by fMRI. Eisenberger, Lieberman, and Williams (2003) found that participants who were excluded from social participation showed a similar pattern of brain acti- vation (in the right ventral prefrontal cortex) as participants experiencing physical pain. (See photo on p. 106.) Longe and colleagues (2010) found that fMRI was effective at detecting neural correlates for self-critical thinking. Some researchers have pointed out that fMRI has a high potential for contributing to a treatment approach in mental health care (Schneider et al., 2009). Although some research has suggested that fMRI can be an effective procedure at detecting malingering or lying (Langleben et al., 2005), one court has recently ruled against the use of fMRI as a lie detector (Couzin-Frankel, 2010). Other studies have addressed problems in abnormal behavior. One study showed that the impaired time estimation found in schizophrenics might result from dysfunction in specific areas of the brain, thalamus, and prefrontal cortex (Suzuki et al., 2004), while others addressed cortical functioning in auditory hallucina- tions in schizophrenia (Shergill et al., 2000); effects of neuroleptic medication with schizophrenics (Braus et al., 1999); and the neu- roanatomy of anxiety (Paulesu et al. 2010) and depression (Brody et al., 2001). Finally, Whalley and colleagues (2004) found that fMRI technique has the potential of adding to our understanding of the early development of psychological disorder. One study of treatment for   aphasia , a disorder in which there is a loss of abil- ity to communicate verbally (Meinzer et al., 2007), showed that changes in behavioral performance and the brain activation pat- tern were disclosed as affecting the brain’s reorganization. There are some clear methodological limitations that can influence fMRI results. For example, both MRI and fMRI are quite sensitive to instrument errors or inaccurate observations as a result of slight movements of the person being evaluated (Davidson et al., 2003). Additionally, the results of fMRI studies are often difficult to interpret. Even though group differences emerge between a cognitively impaired group and a control sample, the results usually do not provide much specific information about the processes studied. Fletcher (2004) provides a somewhat sobering analysis of the current status of fMRI in contemporary psychiatry, noting that many professionals who had hoped for intricate and unambiguous results might be disappointed with the overall lack of effective, pragmatic methodology in fMRI assessment of cogni- tive processes. At this point the fMRI is not considered to be a valid or useful diagnostic tool for mental disorders; however, inves- tigators are optimistic that this procedure shows great promise for understanding brain functioning (MacDonald & Jones, 2009). The primary value of this procedure continues to be research into cortical activity and cognitive processes.  The neuropsychological examination  The techniques described so far have shown success in identify- ing brain abnormalities that are very often accompanied by gross impairments in behavior and varied psychological deficits. How- ever, behavioral and psychological impairments due to organic brain abnormalities may manifest before any organic brain lesion is detectable by scanning or other means. In these instances, reli- able techniques are needed to measure any alteration in behav- ioral or psychological functioning that has occurred because of the organic brain pathology. This need is met by a growing cadre of psychologists specializing in   neuropsychological assessment , which involves the use of various testing devices to measure a person’s cognitive, perceptual, and motor performance as clues to the extent and location of brain damage (Snyder, Nussbaum, & Robins, 2006). In many instances of known or suspected organic brain involvement, a clinical neuropsychologist administers a test bat- tery to a patient. The person’s performance on standardized tasks, particularly perceptual-motor tasks, can give valuable clues about any cognitive and intellectual impairment following brain damage (Cullum & Lacritz, 2009; Lezak, 1995; Horton, 2008; Reitan & Wolfson, 1985). Such testing can even provide clues to the probable location of the brain damage, although PET scans, MRIs, and other physical tests may be more effective in deter- mining the exact location of the injury. Many neuropsychologists prefer to administer a highly indi- vidualized array of tests, depending on a patient’s case history and other available information. Others administer a standard  The functional MRI (fMRI), like the MRI, allows clinicians to “map” brain structure. The exciting breakthrough in fMRI technology gives clinicians the ability to measure brain activities underlying such things as sensations, images, and thoughts, revealing the specific areas of the brain involved.
set of tests that have been preselected to sample, in a systematic and comprehensive manner, a broad range of psychological competencies known to be adversely affected by various types of brain injury (Gass, 2009). The use of a constant set of tests has many research and clinical advantages, although it may compro- mise flexibility. Consider the components of one such standard procedure, the Halstead-Reitan neuropsychological test battery. The Halstead-Reitan battery is composed of several tests and variables from which an “index of impairment” can be computed (Horton, 2008; Reitan & Wolfson, 1985). In addition, it pro- vides specific information about a subject’s functioning in several skill areas. The Halstead-Reitan battery for adults is made up of a group of tests such as the following: 1.   Halstead Category Test:   Measures a subject’s ability to learn and remember material and can provide clues as to his or her judgment and impulsivity. The subject is pre- sented with a stimulus (on a screen) that suggests a number between 1 and 4. The subject presses a button indicating the number she or he believes was suggested. A correct choice is followed by the sound of a pleasant doorbell, an incorrect choice by a loud buzzer. The person is required to determine from the pattern of buzzers and bells what the underlying principle of the correct choice is. 2.   Tactual Performance Test:   Measures a subject’s motor speed, response to the unfamiliar, and ability to learn and use tactile and kinesthetic cues. The test surface is a board that has spaces for 10 blocks of varied shapes. The subject is blindfolded (never actually seeing the board) and asked to place the blocks into the correct grooves in the board. Later, the subject is asked to draw the blocks and the board from tactile memory. 3.   Rhythm Test:   Measures attention and sustained concentra- tion through an auditory perception task. It includes 30 pairs of rhythmic beats that are presented on a tape recorder. The subject is asked whether the pairs are the same or different. 4.   Speech Sounds Perception Test:   Determines whether an individual can identify spoken words. Nonsense words are presented on a tape recorder, and the subject is asked to identify the presented word in a list of four printed words. This task measures the subject’s concentration, attention, and comprehension. 5.   Finger Oscillation Task:   Measures the speed at which an individual can depress a lever with the index finger. Several trials are given for each hand. In summary, the medical and neuropsychological sciences are developing many new procedures to assess brain function- ing and behavioral manifestations of organic disorder. Medical procedures to assess organic brain damage include EEGs and CAT, PET, and MRI scans. The new technology holds great promise for detecting and evaluating organic brain dysfunction and increasing our understanding of brain function. Neuropsy- chological testing provides a clinician with important behavioral information on how organic brain damage is affecting a person’s present functioning. However, in cases where the psychological difficulty is thought to result from nonorganic causes, psychoso- cial assessment is used.  in review  •   Compare and contrast five important neurological procedures. What makes each one particularly valuable?  •   What is the difference between a PET scan and an fMRI?  •   Describe the use of neuropsychological tests in evaluating the behavioral effects of organic brain disorders.  Psychosocial Assessment  Psychosocial assessment attempts to provide a realistic picture of an individual in interaction with his or her social environment. This picture includes relevant information about the individual’s personality makeup and present level of functioning, as well as information about the stressors and resources in her or his life situation. For example, early in the process, clinicians may act as puzzle solvers, absorbing as much information about the client as possible—present feelings, attitudes, memories, demographic facts—and trying to fit the pieces together into a meaningful pattern. Clinicians typically formulate hypotheses and discard or confirm them as they proceed. Starting with a global technique such as a clinical interview, clinicians may later select more spe- cific assessment tasks or tests. The following are some of the psy- chosocial procedures that may be used.  Assessment interviews  An assessment interview, often considered the central element of the assessment process, usually involves a face-to-face interaction in which a clinician obtains information about various aspects of a client’s situation, behavior, and personality (Berthold & Ellinger, 2009; Craig, 2009; Meers, 2009). The interview may vary from a simple set of questions or prompts to a more extended and detailed format (Kici & Westhoff, 2004). It may be relatively open in character, with an interviewer making moment- to-moment decisions about his or her next question on the basis of responses to previous ones, or it may be more tightly con- trolled and structured so as to ensure that a particular set of ques- tions is covered. In the latter case, the interviewer may choose from a number of highly structured, standardized interview for- mats whose reliability has been established in prior research.  STRucTuReD AnD unSTRucTuReD inTeRViewS   Although many clinicians prefer the freedom to explore as they feel responses merit, the research data show that the more controlled and   struc- tured assessment interview   yields far more reliable results than the flexible format. There appears to be widespread overconfi- dence among clinicians in the accuracy of their own methods and judgments (Taylor & Meux, 1997). Every rule has exceptions, but in most instances, an assessor is wise to conduct an interview that
is carefully structured in terms of goals, comprehensive symptom review, other content to be explored, and the type of relationship the interviewer attempts to establish with the person. Structured interviews follow a predetermined set of questions throughout the interview. For example, “Have you ever had peri- ods in which you could not sleep lately?” and “Have you experi- enced feeling very nervous about being in public?” The beginning statements or introduction to the interview follow set procedures. The themes and questions are predetermined to obtain particular responses for all items. The interviewer cannot deviate from the question lists and procedures. All questions are asked of each cli- ent in a preset way. Each question is structured in a manner so as to allow responses to be quantified or clearly determined. On the negative side, structured interviews typically take longer to admin- ister than unstructured interviews and may include some seemingly tangential questions. Clients can sometimes be frustrated by the overly detailed questions in areas that are of no concern to them.  Unstructured assessment interviews   are typically subjective and do not follow a predetermined set of questions. The begin- ning statements in the interview are usually general, and follow-up questions are tailored for each client. The content of the interview questions is influenced by the habits or theoretical views of the interviewer. The interviewer does not ask the same questions of all clients; rather, he or she subjectively decides what to ask based on the client’s response to previous questions. Because the questions are asked in an unplanned way, important criteria needed for a  DSM-5   diagnosis might be skipped. Responses based on unstruc- tured interviews are difficult to quantify or compare with responses of clients from other interviews. Thus, uses of unstructured inter- views in mental health research are limited. On the positive side, unstructured interviews can be viewed by clients as being more sen- sitive to their needs or problems than more structured procedures. Moreover, the spontaneous follow-up questions that emerge in an unstructured interview can, at times, provide valuable information that would not emerge in a structured interview. The reliability of the assessment interview may be enhanced by the use of   rating scales   that help focus inquiry and quantify the interview data. For example, the person may be rated on a 3-, 5-, or 7-point scale with respect to self-esteem, anxiety, and various other characteristics. Such a structured and preselected format is particularly effective in giving a comprehensive impres- sion, or “profile,” of the subject and her or his life situation and in revealing specific problems or crises—such as marital difficul- ties, drug dependence, or suicidal fantasies—that may require immediate therapeutic intervention. Clinical interviews can be subject to error because they rely on human judgment to choose the questions and process the informa- tion. Evidence of this unreliability includes the fact that different clinicians have often arrived at different formal diagnoses on the basis of the interview data they elicited from a particular client. It is chiefly for this reason that recent versions of the   DSM   (that is, III, III-R, IV, and IV-TR) have emphasized an “operational” assess- ment approach, one that specifies observable criteria for diagnosis and provides specific guidelines for making diagnostic judgments. “Winging it” has limited use in this type of assessment process. The operational approach leads to more reliable psychiatric diag- noses, perhaps at some cost in reduced interviewer flexibility.  The clinical observation of Behavior  One of the traditional and most useful assessment tools that a clinician has available is direct observation of a client’s charac- teristic behavior (Hartmann et al., 2004). The main purpose of direct observation is to learn more about the person’s psychological functioning by attending to his or her appearance and behavior in various contexts. Clinical observation is the clinician’s objective description of the person’s appearance and behavior—her or his personal hygiene and emotional responses and any depression, anx- iety, aggression, hallucinations, or delusions she or he may manifest. Ideally, clinical observation takes place in a natural environment (such as observing a child’s behavior in a classroom or at home), but it is more likely to take place upon admission to a clinic or hos- pital (Leichtman, 2009). For example, a brief description is usually made of a subject’s behavior upon hospital admission, and more detailed observations are made periodically on the ward. Some practitioners and researchers use a more controlled, rather than a naturalistic, behavioral setting for conducting observations in contrived situations. These   analogue situations , which are designed to yield information about the person’s adap- tive strategies, might involve such tasks as staged   role-playing , event reenactment, family interaction assignments, or think- aloud procedures (Haynes et al., 2009). In addition to making their own observations, many clini- cians enlist their clients’ help by providing them instruction in   self-monitoring : self-observation and objective reporting of behavior, thoughts, and feelings as they occur in various natural settings. This method can be a valuable aid in determining the kinds of situations in which maladaptive behavior is likely to be evoked, and numerous studies also show it to have therapeutic  During an assessment interview, a clinician ob- tains information about various aspects of a pa- tient’s situation, behavior, and personality makeup. The interview is usually conducted face-to-face and may have a relatively open structure or be more tightly controlled, depending on the goals and style of the clinician.
benefits in its own right. Alternatively, a client may be asked to fill out a more or less formal self-report or a checklist concerning problematic reactions experienced in various situations. Many instruments have been published in the professional literature and are commercially available to clinicians. These approaches recognize that people are excellent sources of information about themselves. Assuming that the right questions are asked and that people are willing to disclose information about themselves, the results can have a crucial bearing on treatment planning.  RATinG ScAleS   As in the case of interviews, the use of rat- ing scales in clinical observation and in self-reports helps both to organize information and to encourage reliability and objectiv- ity (Aiken, 1996; Garb, 2007). That is, the formal structure of a scale is likely to keep observer inferences to a minimum. The most useful rating scales are those that enable a rater to indicate not only the presence or absence of a trait or behavior but also its prominence or degree. The following item is an example from such a rating scale; the observer would check the most appropri- ate description.  Sexual Behavior  ___   1.   Sexually assaultive: aggressively approaches males or females with sexual intent. ___   2.   Sexually soliciting: exposes genitals with sexual intent, makes overt sexual advances to other patients or staff, and masturbates openly. ___   3.   No overt sexual behavior: not preoccupied with discus- sion of sexual matters. ___   4.   Avoids sex topics: made uneasy by discussion of sex, becomes disturbed if approached sexually by others. ___   5.   Excessive prudishness about sex: considers sex filthy, con- demns sexual behavior in others, becomes panic-stricken if approached sexually. Ratings like these may be made not only as part of an initial evaluation but also to check on the course or outcome of treat- ment. One of the rating scales most widely used for recording observations in clinical practice and in psychiatric research is the  Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS)   (Overall & Hollister, 1982; Serper et al., 2004). The BPRS provides a structured and quantifiable format for rating clinical symptoms such as over- concern with physical symptoms, anxiety, emotional withdrawal, guilt feelings, hostility, suspiciousness, and unusual thought pat- terns. It contains 24 scales that are scored from ratings made by a clinician following an interview with a patient. The distinct pat- terns of behavior reflected in the BPRS ratings enable clinicians to make a standardized comparison of their patients’ symptoms with the behavior of other psychiatric patients. The BPRS has been found to be an extremely useful instrument in clinical research (e.g., see Davidson et al., 2004), especially for the purpose of assigning patients to treatment groups on the basis of similarity in symptoms. However, it is not widely used for making treatment or diagnostic decisions in clinical practice. The Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HRSD), a similar but more specifically tar- geted instrument, is one of the most widely used procedures for selecting clinically depressed research subjects and also for assess- ing the response of such subjects to various treatments (see Beevers & Miller, 2004; Brown et al., 2007).  Psychological Tests  Interviews and behavioral observation are relatively direct attempts to determine a person’s beliefs, attitudes, and problems. Psychological tests are a more indirect means of assessing psy- chological characteristics. Scientifically developed psychological tests (as opposed to the recreational ones sometimes appearing in magazines or on the Internet) are standardized sets of procedures or tasks for obtaining samples of behavior. A subject’s responses to the standardized stimuli are compared with those of other people who have comparable demographic characteristics, usually through established test norms or test score distributions. From these comparisons, a clinician can then draw inferences about how much the person’s psychological qualities differ from those of a reference group, typically a psychologically normal one. Among the characteristics that these tests can measure are coping pat- terns, motive patterns, personality characteristics, role behaviors, values, levels of depression or anxiety, and intellectual function- ing. Impressive advances in the technology of test development  There are a wide variety of psychological tests that measure the intellectual abilities of children. The researcher in this photo is measuring this child’s cognitive development by evaluating how she classifies and sorts the candy.
have made it possible to create instruments of acceptable reliabil- ity and validity to measure almost any conceivable psychological characteristic on which people may vary. Moreover, many pro- cedures are available in a computer-administered and computer- interpreted format (see the Developments in Practice box). Although psychological tests are more precise and often more reliable than interviews or some observational techniques, they are far from perfect tools. Their value often depends on the competence of the clinician who interprets them. In general, they are useful diagnostic tools for psychologists in much the same way that blood tests, X-ray films, and MRI scans are use- ful to physicians. In all these cases, pathology may be revealed in people who appear to be normal, or a general impression of “something wrong” can be checked against more precise infor- mation. Two general categories of psychological tests for use in clinical practice are intelligence tests and personality tests (pro- jective and objective).  inTelliGence TeSTS   A clinician can choose from a wide range of   intelligence tests . The Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Chil- dren-Revised (WISC-IV) (see Weiss et al., 2006) and the current edition of the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale (Kamphaus & Kroncke, 2004) are widely used in clinical settings for measuring the intellectual abilities of children (Wasserman, 2003). Probably the most commonly used test for measuring adult intelligence is the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised (WAIS-IV) (Benson et al., 2010; Lichtenberger & Kaufman, 2009). It includes both verbal and performance material and consists of 15 subtests. A brief description of two of the subtests will serve to illustrate the types of functions the WAIS-IV measures.  •   Vocabulary (verbal):   This subtest consists of a list of words to define that are presented orally to the individual. This task is designed to evaluate knowledge of vocabulary, which has been shown to be highly related to general intelligence.  •   Digit Span (performance):   In this test of short-term mem- ory, a sequence of numbers is administered orally. The indi- vidual is asked to repeat the digits in the order administered. Another task in this subtest involves the individual’s remem- bering the numbers, holding them in memory, and reversing the order sequence—that is, the individual is instructed to say them backward (Lichtenberger & Kaufman, 2009). Individually administered intelligence tests—such as the WISC-IV, the WAIS-IV, and the Stanford-Binet—typically require 2 to 3 hours to administer, score, and interpret. In many clinical situations, there is not enough time or funding to use these tests. In cases where intellectual impairment or organic brain damage is thought to be central to a patient’s problem, intelli- gence testing may be the most crucial diagnostic procedure in the test battery. Moreover, information about cognitive functioning or deterioration can provide valuable clues to a person’s intel- lectual resources in dealing with problems (Kihlstrom, 2002). Yet in many clinical settings and for many clinical cases, gaining a thorough understanding of a client’s problems and initiating a  developments in PRACTICE  The Automated Practice: Use of the Computer in Psychological Testing  P erhaps the most dramatic innovation in clinical assessment during the last 40 years has been the increasing use of computers in individual assessment. Computers are ef- fectively used in assessment both to gather information directly from an individual and to assemble and evaluate all the informa- tion that has been gathered previously through interviews, tests, and other assessment procedures. By comparing the incoming information with data previously stored in its memory banks, a computer can perform a wide range of assessment tasks (Butcher et al., 2009; Butcher, 2009). It can supply a probable diagnosis, indicate the likelihood of certain kinds of behavior, suggest the most appropriate form of treatment, predict the outcome, and print out a summary report concerning the sub- ject. In many of these functions, a computer is actually superior to a clinician because it is more efficient and accurate in recalling stored material (Epstein & Klinkenberg, 2001; Olson, 2001). With the increased efficiency and reliability of the use of com- puters in clinical practice, one might expect a nearly unanimous welcoming of computers into the clinic. This is not always the case, however, and some practitioners we know even resist using such “modern” techniques as e-mail, fax machines, and computerized billing in their practices (McMinn et al., 1999). Some clinicians are reluctant to use computer-based test inter- pretations in spite of their demonstrated utility and low cost. Even though many clinics and independent practitioners use microcomputers for record keeping and billing purposes, a smaller number incorporate computer-based clinical assessment procedures into their practice. Possible reasons for the underuti- lization of computer-based assessment procedures include the following: (1) Practitioners who were trained before the wide- spread use of computers may feel uncomfortable with them or may not have time to get acquainted with their use; (2) they may limit their practice to psychological treatment and do not use extensive pretreatment assessments in their practice; (3) they may have little interest in, or time for, the systematic evaluation of treatment efficacy that periodic formal assessments facilitate; or (4) they may feel that the impersonal and mechanized look of the booklets and answer sheets common to much computerized assessment is inconsistent with the image and style of warm and personal engagement they hope to convey to clients.
treatment program do not require knowing the kind of detailed information about intellectual functioning that these instruments provide. In these cases, intelligence testing is not recommended.  PRojecTiVe PeRSonAliTy TeSTS   There are a great many tests designed to measure personal characteristics other than intellectual ability. It is customary to group these   personality tests   into projective and objective measures.   Projective personality tests   are unstructured in that they rely on various ambiguous stimuli such as inkblots or vague pictures rather than on explicit verbal questions, and in that the person’s responses are not limited to the “true,” “false,” or “cannot say” variety. Through their interpretations of these ambiguous materials, people reveal a good deal about their personal preoccupations, conflicts, motives, coping techniques, and other personality characteristics. An assumption underlying the use of projec- tive techniques is that in trying to make sense out of vague, unstructured stimuli, individuals “project” their own problems, motives, and wishes into the situation. Such responses are akin to the childhood pastime of seeing objects or scenes in cloud formations, with the important exception that the stimuli are in this case fixed and largely the same for all subjects. It is the latter circumstance that permits determination of the normative range of responses to the test materials, which in turn can be used to identify objectively deviant responding. Thus projective tests are aimed at discovering the ways in which an individual’s past learning and personality structure may lead him or her to orga- nize and perceive ambiguous information from the environment. Prominent among the several projective tests in common use are the Rorschach Inkblot Test, the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), and sentence completion tests.  The Rorschach   The   Rorschach Inkblot Test   is named after the Swiss psychiatrist Hermann Rorschach (1884–1922), who initiated the experimental use of inkblots in personality assessment in 1911. The test uses 10 inkblot pictures, to which a subject responds in succession after being instructed as follows (Exner, 1993):  People may see many different things in these inkblot pictures; now tell me what you see, what it makes you think of, what it means to you.  The following excerpts are taken from a subject’s responses to one of the actual blots:  This looks like two men with genital organs exposed. They have had a terrible fight and blood has splashed up against the wall. They have knives or sharp instruments in their hands and have just cut up a body. They have already taken out the lungs and other organs. The body is dismembered . . . nothing remains but a shell . . . the pelvic region. They were fighting as to who will complete the final dismemberment ... like two vultures swooping down . . . .  The extremely violent content of this response was not com- mon for this particular blot or for any other blot in the series. Although no responsible examiner would base conclusions on a single instance, such content was consistent with other data from this subject, who was diagnosed as an antisocial personality with strong hostility. Use of the Rorschach in clinical assessment is complicated and requires considerable training (Exner & Erdberg, 2002; Weiner & Meyer, 2009). Methods of administering the test vary; some approaches can take several hours and hence must compete for time with other essential clinical services. Furthermore, the results of the Rorschach can be unreliable because of the subjective nature of test interpretations. For example, interpreters might disagree on the symbolic significance of the response “a house in flames.” One person might interpret this particular response as suggesting great feelings of anxiety, whereas another interpreter might see it as suggesting a desire on the part of the patient to set fires. One rea- son for the diminished use of the Rorschach in projective testing today comes from the fact that many clinical treatments used in today’s mental health facilities generally require specific behavioral descriptions rather than descriptions of deep-seated personality dynamics, such as those that typically result from interpretation of the Rorschach Test. In the hands of a skilled interpreter, however, the Rorschach can be useful in uncovering certain psychodynamic issues, such as the impact of unconscious motivations on current perceptions of others (Weiner, 2013). Furthermore, there have been attempts to objectify Rorschach interpretations by clearly specifying test variables and empirically exploring their relationship to external criteria such as clinical diagnoses (Exner, 1995). The Rorschach, although generally considered an open-ended, subjective instru- ment, has been adapted for computer interpretation (Exner, 1987). In a study of the reliability of conclusions drawn from the computer intepretation system, Meyer and colleagues (2005) found that clinicians tended to draw the same conclusions from Rorschach responses as the computer system did.  David Wechsler (1896– 1981) served in the military, testing army recruits during World War I. He came to believe that the ways in which psychologists viewed and measured “intelligence” was inadequate. In 1934 he began construction of the most widely used adult intelligence test battery, the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS), which set the standard for practical measurement of intelligence.
Some researchers, however, have raised questions about the norms on which the Exner Rorschach Comprehensive System, a scoring and interpretation system, is based (Shaffer et al., 1999; Wood et al., 2001). The Rorschach was shown to “overpatholo- gize” persons taking the test—that is, the test appears to show psychopathology even when the person is a “normal” person randomly drawn from the community. The extent to which the Rorschach provides valid information beyond what is available from other, more economical instruments has not been demon- strated. Although some researchers have rallied support for the Comprehensive System (Hibbard, 2003; Weiner & Meyer, 2009), the Rorschach test has also been widely criticized as an instrument with low or negligible validity (Garb et al., 1998; Hunsley & Bailey, 1999). The use of the test in clinical assessment has dimin- ished somewhat (Piotrowski et al., 1998), in part because insur- ance companies do not pay for the considerable amount of time needed to administer, score, and interpret the test. However, the Rorschach remains one of the most frequently used instruments in personality assessment—even in some personnel assessment set- tings, as described by Del Guidice (2010)—and research today.  The Thematic Apperception Test   The   Thematic Apperception Test (TAT)   was introduced in 1935 by its authors, C. D. Morgan and Henry Murray of the Harvard Psychological Clinic. It still is widely used in clinical practice (Rossini & Moretti, 1997) and personality research (Teglasi, 2010). The TAT uses a series of simple pictures, some highly representational and others quite abstract, about which a subject is instructed to make up sto- ries. The content of the pictures, much of them depicting people in various contexts, is highly ambiguous as to actions and motives, so subjects tend to project their own conflicts and worries onto it (see Morgan, 2002, for a historical description of the test stimuli). Several scoring and interpretation systems have been devel- oped to focus on different aspects of a subject’s stories such as expressions of needs (Atkinson, 1992), the person’s perception of reality (Arnold, 1962), and the person’s fantasies (Klinger, 1979). It is time-consuming to apply these systems, and there is little evidence that they make a clinically significant contribu- tion. Hence, most often a clinician simply makes a qualitative and subjective determination of how the story content reflects the person’s underlying traits, motives, and preoccupations. Such interpretations often depend as much on “art” as on “science,” and there is much room for error in such an informal procedure. An example of the way a subject’s problems may be reflected in TAT stories is shown in the following case, which is based on Card 1 (a picture of a boy staring at a violin on a table in front of him). The client, David, was a 15-year-old boy who had been referred to the clinic by his parents because of their concern about his withdrawal and poor work at school.  David’s TAT Response   David was generally coopera- tive during the testing, although he remained rather unemo- tional and unenthusiastic throughout. When he was given Card 1 of the TAT, he paused for over a minute, carefully scrutinizing the card. “I think this is a ... uh ... machine gun ... yeah, it’s a machine gun. The guy is staring at it. Maybe he got it for his birthday or stole it or something.” [Pause. The examiner reminded him that he was to make up a story about the picture.] “OK. This boy, I’ll call him Karl, found this machine gun ... a Browning automatic rifle ... in his garage. He kept it in his room for protection. One day he decided to take it to school to quiet down the jocks that lord it over everyone. When he walked into the locker hall, he cut loose on the top jock, Amos, and wasted him. Nobody bothered him after that because they knew he kept the BAR in his locker.” It was inferred from this story that David was experienc- ing a high level of frustration and anger in his life. The extent of this anger was reflected in his perception of the violin in the picture as a machine gun—an instrument of violence. The clini- cian concluded that David was feeling threatened not only by people at school but even in his own home, where he needed “protection.”  This example shows how stories based on TAT cards may provide a clinician with information about a person’s conflicts and worries as well as clues as to how the person is handling these problems. The TAT has been criticized on several grounds (Lilienfeld et al., 2001). There is a “dated” quality to the test stimuli: The pictures, developed in the 1930s, appear quaint to many con- temporary subjects, who have difficulty identifying with the characters in the pictures. Subjects often preface their stories with, “This is something from a movie I saw on the late-night movies.” Additionally, the TAT can require a great deal of time to administer and interpret. As with the Rorschach, interpreta- tion of responses to the TAT is generally subjective, which limits the reliability and validity of the test. A review (Rossini & Moretti, 1997) pointed out an inter- esting paradox: Even though the TAT remains popular among practicing clinicians, clinical training programs have reduced the amount of time devoted to teaching graduate students about the TAT, and relatively few contemporary training resources (such as books and manuals) exist. Again, we must note that some examiners, notably those who have long experi- ence in the instrument’s use, are capable of making astonish- ingly accurate interpretations with TAT stories. Typically, however, they have difficulty teaching these skills to others. On reflection, such an observation should not be unduly sur- prising, but it does point to the essentially “artistic” element involved at this skill level.  Sentence completion Test   Another projective procedure that has proved useful in personality assessment is the   sentence completion test   (Fernald & Fernald, 2010). A number of such tests have been designed for children, adolescents, and adults.
Such tests consist of the beginnings of sentences that a person is asked to complete, as in these examples: 1. I wish ________________________________________ 2. My mother ____________________________________ 3. Sex __________________________________________ 4. I hate ________________________________________ 5. People _______________________________________ Sentence completion tests, which are related to the free- association method, a procedure in which the client is asked to respond freely, are somewhat more structured than the Rorschach and most other projective tests. They help examiners pinpoint important clues to an individual’s problems, attitudes, and symptoms through the content of her or his responses. Interpretation of the item responses, however, is generally sub- jective and unreliable. Despite the fact that the test stimuli (the sentence stems) are standard, interpretation is usually done in an ad hoc manner and without benefit of normative comparisons. In sum, projective tests have an important place in many clinical settings, particularly those that attempt to obtain a com- prehensive picture of a person’s psychodynamic functioning and those that have the necessary trained staff to conduct extensive individual psychological evaluations. The great strengths of pro- jective techniques—their unstructured nature and their focus on the unique aspects of personality—are at the same time their weaknesses because they make interpretation subjective, unreli- able, and difficult to validate. Moreover, projective tests typically require a great deal of time to administer and advanced skill to interpret—both scarce quantities in many clinical settings.  oBjecTiVe PeRSonAliTy TeSTS   Objective personality tests  are structured—that is, they typically use questionnaires, self- report inventories, or rating scales in which questions or items are carefully phrased and alternative responses are specified as choices. They therefore involve a far more controlled format than projec- tive devices and thus are more amenable to objectively based quan- tification. One virtue of such quantification is its precision, which in turn enhances the reliability of test outcomes. There are a large number of available personality assessment measures for use in personality and clinical assessment. For exam- ple, the NEO-PI (Neuroticism-Extroversion-Openness Personality Inventory) provides information on the major dimen- sions in personality and is widely used in evaluating personality fac- tors in normal-range populations (Costa & Widiger, 2002). There are also many objective assessment instruments developed to assess focused clinical problems. For example, the Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory (MCMI-III; see Choca, 2004) was developed to evaluate the underlying personality dimensions among clients in psychological treatment. In this chapter, we will focus primarily upon the most widely used person- ality assessment instrument, the MMPI-2.  The mmPi   One of the major structured inven- tories for personality assessment is the   Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) , now called the MMPI-2 for adults after a revision in 1989 (Butcher, 2011; Greene, 2011). We focus on it here because in many ways it is the prototype and the standard of this class of instruments. Several years in development, the MMPI was introduced for general use in 1943 by Starke Hathaway and J. C. McKinley; it is today the most widely used personality test for clinical and   foren- sic —court related—assessment and in psycho- pathology research in the United States (Archer et al., 2006; Lally, 2003). It is also the assessment instrument most frequently taught in gradu- ate clinical psychology programs (Piotrowski & Zalewski, 1993). Over 19,000 books and articles on the MMPI instruments have been published since the test was introduced. Moreover, translated versions of the inventory are widely used interna- tionally (the original MMPI was translated over 150 times and used in over 46 countries; Butcher, 2010). Inter- national use of the revised inventory is increasing rapidly; over 32 translations have been made since it was published in 1989 (Butcher & Williams, 2009).  Starke R. Hathaway (1903–1984), clinical psychologist, was a pioneer in physiological psychology and personality assessment. In 1940, he and J. C. McKinley published the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inven- tory (MMPI) for evaluating symptoms and behavior of psychiatric and medical pa- tients. The MMPI became the most widely used personality assessment instrument in use, and its revised version (MMPI-2) is the most frequently used personality measure today.  J. C. McKinley (1891–1950), a neuropsychia- trist at the University of Minnesota Hospital, coauthored the MMPI with Starke Hathaway and conducted research on the MMPI with both medical and psychiatric populations.
The Validity and clinical Scales of the mmPi   The origi- nal MMPI, a self-report questionnaire, consisted of 550 items covering topics ranging from physical condition and psycho- logical states to moral and social attitudes. Typically, clients are encouraged to answer all of the items either “true” or “false.” The pool of items was originally administered to a large group of normal individuals (affectionately called the “Minnesota nor- mals”) and several quite homogeneous groups of patients with particular psychiatric diagnoses. Answers to all the items were then item-analyzed to see which ones differentiated the various groups. On the basis of the findings, the 10 clinical scales were constructed, each consisting of the items that were answered by one of the patient groups in the direction opposite to the predominant response of the normal group. This rather inge- nious method of selecting scorable items, known as “empirical keying,” originated with the MMPI and doubtless accounts for much of the instrument’s power. Note that it involves no subjec- tive prejudgment about the “meaning” of a true or false answer to any item; that meaning resides entirely in whether the answer is the same as the answer deviantly given by patients of vary- ing diagnoses. Should an examinee’s pattern of true and false responses closely approximate that of a particular pathological group, it is a reasonable inference that he or she shares other psy- chiatrically significant characteristics with that group—and may in fact “psychologically” be a member of that group. (See the MMPI-2 profile in Table 4.1.)  table   4.1  The Scales of the mmPi-2 Validity Scales  Cannot say score (?)   Measures the total number of unanswered items Infrequency scale (F)   Measures the tendency to falsely claim or exaggerate psychological problems in the first part of the booklet; alternatively, detects random responding Infrequency scale (FB)   Measures the tendency to falsely claim or exaggerate psychological problems on items toward the end of the booklet Infrequency scale (Fp)   Measures the tendency to exaggerate psychological problems among psychiatric inpatients Lie scale (L)   Measures the tendency to claim excessive virtue or to try to present an overall favorable image Defensiveness scale (K)   Measures the tendency to see oneself in an unrealistically positive way Superlative Self-Presentation scale (S)   Measures the tendency for some people to present themselves in a highly positive manner or su- perlative manner. The S scale contains 5 subscales that address ways in which the person presents in an overpositive manner. Response Inconsistency scale (VRIN)   Measures the tendency to endorse items in an inconsistent or random manner Response Inconsistency scale (TRIN)   Measures the tendency to endorse items in an inconsistently true or false manner  clinical Scales  Scale 1 Hypochondriasis (Hs)   Measures excessive somatic concern and physical complaints Scale 2 Depression (D)   Measures symptomatic depression Scale 3 Hysteria (Hy)   Measures hysteroid personality features such as a “rose-colored glasses” view of the world and the tendency to develop physical problems under stress Scale 4 Psychopathic deviate (Pd)   Measures antisocial tendencies Scale 5 Masculinity-femininity (Mf)   Measures gender-role reversal Scale 6 Paranoia (Pa)   Measures suspicious, paranoid ideation Scale 7 Psychasthenia (Pt)   Measures anxiety and obsessive, worrying behavior Scale 8 Schizophrenia (Sc)   Measures peculiarities in thinking, feeling, and social behavior Scale 9 Hypomania (Ma)   Measures unrealistically elated mood state and tendencies to yield to impulses Scale 0 Social introversion (Si)   Measures social anxiety, withdrawal, and overcontrol  Special Scales  Scale APS Addiction Proneness scale   Assesses the extent to which the person matches personality features of people in substance-use treatment Scale AAS Addiction Acknowledgment scale   Assesses the extent to which the person has acknowledged substance-abuse problems Scale MAC-R MacAndrew Addiction scale   An empirical scale measuring proneness to become addicted to various substances Scale MDS Marital Distress scale   Assesses perceived marital relationship problems Hostility scale (Ho)   Addresses hostility or anger control problems Posttraumatic Stress scale (Pk)   Assesses a number of symptoms and attitudes that are found among people who are experienc- ing posttraumatic stress problems
Each of these 10 clinical scales thus measures tendencies to respond in psychologically deviant ways. Raw scores on these scales are compared with the corresponding scores of the normal population, many of whom did (and do) answer a few items in the critical direction (suggesting psychological problems), and the results are plotted on the standard MMPI profile form. By drawing a line connecting the scores for the different scales, a clinician can construct a profile that shows how far from normal a patient’s performance is on each of the scales. To reiterate the basic strategy with an example, the Schizophrenia scale is made up of the items that patients diagnosed with schizophrenia con- sistently answered in a way that differentiated them from normal individuals. People who score high (relative to norms) on this scale, though not necessarily schizophrenic, often show charac- teristics typical of that clinical population. For instance, high scorers on this scale may be socially inept, may be withdrawn, and may have peculiar thought processes; they may have dimin- ished contact with reality and, in severe cases, may have delu- sions and hallucinations. The MMPI also includes a number of validity scales to detect whether a patient has answered the questions in a straight- forward, honest manner. For example, there is one scale that detects lying by one’s claiming of extreme virtue and several scales that detect possible malingering or faking of symptoms. Extreme endorsement of the items on any of these scales may invalidate the test, whereas lesser endorsements frequently con- tribute important interpretive insights. In addition to the validity scales and the 10 clinical scales, a number of additional scales have been devised—for example, to detect substance abuse, marital distress, and posttraumatic stress disorder. Clinically, the MMPI is used in several ways to evaluate a patient’s personality characteristics and clinical problems. Perhaps the most typical use of the MMPI is as a diagnostic standard. As we have seen, the individual’s profile pattern is compared with profiles of known patient groups. If the profile matches a group, information about patients in this group can suggest a broad descriptive diagnosis for the patient under study.  Revision of the original mmPi   The original MMPI, in spite of being the most widely used personality measure, has not been without its critics. Some psychodynamically oriented clini- cians felt that the MMPI (like other structured, objective tests) was superficial and did not adequately reflect the complexities of an individual taking the test. Some behaviorally oriented critics, on the other hand, criticized the MMPI (and in fact, the entire genre of personality tests) as being too oriented toward measur- ing unobservable “mentalistic” constructs such as traits. A more specific criticism was leveled at the datedness of the MMPI. In response to these criticisms, the publisher of the MMPI sponsored a revision of the instrument. The scales listed on the standard original MMPI-2 profile form are described in Table 4.1. This revised MMPI, designated “MMPI-2” for adults, became available for general professional use in mid-1989 (Butcher, 2011; Butcher, Graham, et al., 2001), and the MMPI- A for adolescents (see Williams & Butcher, 2011) was published in 1992. The original 10 clinical scales were kept on the revised version. The revised versions of the MMPI have been vali- dated in many clinical studies (Butcher et al., 2000; Graham, Ben-Porath, & McNulty, 1999; Greene, 2011). Research has provided strong support for the revised ver- sions of the MMPI (Greene et al., 2003). The clinical scales, which, apart from minimal item deletion or rewording, have been retained in their original form, seem to measure the same properties of personality organization and functioning as they always have. A comparable stability of meaning is observed for the standard validity scales (also essentially unchanged), which have been reinforced with three additional scales to detect ten- dencies to respond untruthfully to some items.  Advantages and limitations of objective Personality Tests   Self-report inventories such as the MMPI have a num- ber of advantages over other types of personality tests. They are cost effective, highly reliable, and objective; they also can be scored and interpreted (and, if desired, even administered) by computer. A number of general criticisms, however, have been leveled against the use of self-report inventories. As we have seen, some clinicians consider them too mechanistic to portray the complexity of human beings and their problems accurately. Also, because these tests require the subject to read, comprehend, and answer verbal material, patients who are illiterate or confused cannot take the tests. Furthermore, the individual’s coopera- tion is required in self-report inventories, and it is possible that the person might distort his or her answers to create a particu- lar impression. The validity scales of the MMPI-2 are a direct attempt to deal with this last criticism. Because of their scoring formats and emphasis on test valida- tion, scientifically constructed objective personality inventories lend themselves particularly well to automated interpretation. The earliest practical applications of computer technology to test scoring and interpretation involved the MMPI. Over 50 years ago, psychologists at the Mayo Clinic programmed a computer to score and interpret clinical profiles. Computerized personality assessment has evolved substantially over the past few years, and other highly sophisticated MMPI and MMPI-2 interpretation systems have been developed (Butcher et al., 2004). Computer- based MMPI interpretation systems typically employ powerful  actuarial procedures   (Grove et al., 2000). In such systems, descriptions of the actual behavior or other established charac- teristics of many subjects with particular patterns of test scores have been stored in the computer. Whenever a person has one of these test score patterns, the appropriate description is printed out in the computer’s evaluation. Such descriptions have been written and stored for a number of different test score patterns, most of them based on MMPI-2 scores. The accumulation of precise actuarial data for an instrument like the MMPI-2 is difficult, time consuming, and expensive.
This is in part because of the complexity of the instrument itself; the potential number of significantly different MMPI-2 profile patterns is legion. The profiles of many subjects therefore do not “fit” the profile types for which actuarial data are available. Problems of actuarial data acquisition also arise at the other end: the behaviors or problems that are to be detected or predicted by the instrument. Many conditions that are of vital clinical impor- tance are relatively rare (for example, suicide) or are psychologi- cally complex (for example, possible psychogenic components in a patient’s physical illness). Thus it is difficult to accumulate enough cases to serve as an adequate actuarial database. In these situations, the interpretive program writer is forced to fall back on general clinical lore and wisdom to formulate clinical descrip- tions appropriate to the types of profiles actually obtained. Sometimes the different paragraphs generated by the com- puter have inconsistencies resulting from the fact that different parts of a subject’s test pattern call up different paragraphs from the computer. The computer simply prints out blindly what has been found to be typical for people making similar scores on the various clinical scales and cannot integrate the descriptions it picks up. At this point the human element comes in: In the clinical use of computers, it is always essential that a trained pro- fessional further interpret and monitor the assessment data (Atlis et al., 2006). Computerized personality assessment is no longer a novelty but an important, dependable adjunct to clinical assessment. Computerized psychological evaluations are a quick and efficient means of providing a clinician with needed information early in the decision-making process. Examples of computer-generated descriptions for the case of Andrea C., presented in the next sec- tion, appear in the evaluations reprinted in the Developments in Practice box starting on page 118.  The Case of Andrea C.: Experiencing Violence in the Workplace  Andrea C., a 49-year-old divorced woman, was employed as a manager in a firm whose office was located in a somewhat iso- lated section of the community. Her responsibilities included opening the office building at 6:00 a.m. and preparing the office activities for the day. She felt somewhat unsafe in opening up the office alone and had complained to upper management about the lack of security in the building. One morning, as she was opening the door to the building, she was accosted by a stranger who hit her on the head, knocking her unconscious, breaking her nose, and cutting her face and neck. The assailant stabbed her several times in her leg and attempted to sexually assault her but ran away with her purse as car lights came on the street. Andrea suffered a number of physical injuries and recur- ring symptoms from the assault and was hospitalized for 8 days following the attack. Her symptoms included a fractured skull, fractured nose, multiple stab wounds on her body, facial inju- ries, dizziness, impaired balance, wrist pain, residual cognitive symptoms from being unconscious, poor memory, intense anxi- ety, and symptoms of posttraumatic stress. After recovery from the physical injuries she was fearful to return to work, and she applied for disability as a result of her injuries. The company for which she worked rejected her request, and she filed a lawsuit for personal injury disability. A psychological evaluation was requested by the company’s insurer to determine the legitimacy of Andrea’s disability claim. As a central part of the evaluation, the MMPI-2 was admin- istered by the psychologist hired by the defense to appraise Andrea’s personality and symptoms (see the validity, clinical, and supplementary profiles shown in Figures 4.1 and 4.2). The MMPI-2 clinical scale pattern shows clear mental health prob- lems. Her clinical scale pattern with the high scores on the D (Depression) scale, the Hs (Hypochondriasis), and Pt (Anxiety) scales, along with the high score obtained on the PTSD scale, indicate that she is experiencing mental health symptoms related to stressful life events. A full description of this symptom picture is presented in the computer-based interpretive report shown in the Developments in Practice box.  figure   4.1  Profile of the MMPI-2 Validity Scales for Andrea C.  Source:   Excerpted from The Minnesota Report ™ : Adult Clinical System-Revised , 4th Edition by James N. Butcher.  MMPI- 2   VALIDITY PATTERN Raw Score:   10   10   12   8   1   4   13   20  T Score:   70   58 T   79   74   49   52   46   43  Response %:   100   100   100   100   100   100   100   100  VRIN  30  Cannot Say (Raw):   0  Percent True:   50  Percent False:   50  Raw Score   T Score   Resp.% S 1   - Beliefs in Human Goodness   4   40   100  S 2   - Serenity   1   33   100  S 3   - Contentment with Life   4   52   100  S 4   - Patience/Denial of Irritability   5   53   100  S 5   - Denial of Moral Flaws   5   61   100 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120  TRIN   F   F   B   F   P   L T K   S  MMPI ® - 2   Outpatient Mental Health Interpretive Report  08/01/2008 , Page   2   ID: AC
Interestingly, the insurance company psychological expert recommended against Andrea’s receiving compensation based on his interpretation of a controversial psychological scale (referred to as the Fake Bad Scale, or FBS) that was designed to assess “malingering.” After an initial hearing to examine the validity and acceptability of the FBS, the judge in the case prohibited the use of the scale as a measure of effort, malingering, or over- reporting of symptoms to bolster his opinion. The case went to trial, and Andrea’s attorneys relied upon the medical evidence and results of the MMPI-2 to support her claim of physical damages and posttraumatic adjustment prob- lems. The jury awarded Andrea substantial damages as a result of the injuries and the trauma that she experienced from the assault.  Evaluating andrEa’s ComputEr-gEnEratEd mmpi-2 rEport   The narrative report of the computer-based MMPI-2 interpretation contains technical test information to assist the as- sessment psychologist in interpreting the test results. The report is considered a professional-to-professional consultation and is not recommended for release to patients. The computer report for Andrea contains detailed data about the relative frequency of the test pattern’s occurrence in relevant clinical settings and in the normative or standardized population. For example, the report provides information as to how Andrea’s elevated clinical scale scores compare with persons being evaluated in an outpatient clinical setting as well as the frequency of the score in the MMPI-2 general normative sample of women. Her test results indicated that her highest score, the Depression scale score, typically occurs in 18.7 percent of the outpatient women. Moreover, only 4.4 per- cent of women in the normative sample obtain this high elevation  figure   4.2  Profile of the MMPI-2 Clinical Scales and Supplementary Scales for Andrea C.  Source: Excerpted from   The Minnesota Report ™ : Adult Clinical System-Revised , 4th Edition by James N. Butcher.  Raw Score:   25   41   39   24   31   13   36   39   20   48   19   26   3   26   30   *  K Correction:   7   5   13   13   3  T Score:   90   94   89   66   62   59   90   90   59   72   50   58   56   77   66   *  Response %:   100   100   100   100   100   100   100   100 100 100   100 100 100 100 100   *  Welsh Code:   2178*3”0’4+5-69/F’+-L/K:  Profile Elevation:   79.6  *MDS scores are reported only for clients who indicate that they are married or separated. MMPI- 2   CLINICAL AND SUPPLEMENTARY SCALES PROFILE  30  D   H   y H   s   P   d   Mf   Pa   Pt   Sc   Ma   Si   MAC-R APS AAS   PK   Ho MDS  40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120  MMPI ® - 2   Outpatient Mental Health Interpretive Report  08/01/2008 , Page   3   ID: AC  developments in PRACTICE  Computer-Based MMPI-2 Report for Andrea C.  profilE validity  This client endorsed a number of psychological problems, sug- gesting that she is experiencing a high degree of stress. Al- though the MMPI-2 clinical scale profile is probably valid, it may show some exaggeration of symptoms. In addition, please note that the client’s approach to the MMPI-2 items was somewhat inconsistent. She endorsed items in a pattern that suggests some carelessness or inattention to content.  symptomatiC pattErns  Her profile configuration, which incorporates correlates of Hs and D, is not as clearly defined as those of many other clients from this clinical setting. In interpreting the profile, the practitio- ner should also consider any prominent clinical scale elevations that are close in elevation to the prototype. This client’s profile presents a broad and mixed picture in which physical complaints and depressed affect are likely to be salient features. The cli- ent is exhibiting much somatic distress and may be experienc- ing a problem with her psychological adjustment. Her physical complaints are probably extreme, possibly reflecting a general lack of effectiveness in life. There are likely to be long-standing personality problems predisposing her to develop physical symptoms under stress. She is probably feeling quite tense and nervous, and she may be feeling that she cannot get by without help for her physical problems. She is likely to be reporting a great deal of pain, and she feels that others do not understand how sick she is feeling. She may be quite irritable and may be- come hostile if her symptoms are not given “proper” attention. Many individuals with this profile have a history of psychophysi- ological disorders. They tend to overreact to minor problems with physical symptoms. Ulcers and gastrointestinal distress are common. The possibility of actual organic problems, therefore, should be carefully evaluated. Individuals with this profile report ( Continued )
a great deal of tension and a depressed mood. They tend to be pessimistic and gloomy in their outlook. In addition, the following description is suggested by the client’s scores on the content scales. She endorsed a number of items suggesting that she is experiencing low morale and a depressed mood. She reports a preoccupation with feeling guilty and un- worthy. She feels that she deserves to be punished for wrongs she has committed. She feels regretful and unhappy about life, and she seems plagued by anxiety and worry about the future. She feels hopeless at times and feels that she is a condemned person. She has difficulty managing routine affairs, and the items she endorsed suggest a poor memory, concentration problems, and an inability to make decisions. She appears to be immobi- lized and withdrawn and has no energy for life. She views her physical health as failing and reports numerous somatic con- cerns. She feels that life is no longer worthwhile and that she is losing control of her thought processes. According to her response content, there is a strong possibility that she has seriously contemplated suicide. She feels some- what self-alienated and expresses some personal misgivings or a vague sense of remorse about past acts. She feels that life is unrewarding and dull, and she finds it hard to settle down. The client’s response content suggests that she feels intensely fearful about a large number of objects and activities. This hypersensi- tivity and fearfulness appear to be generalized at this point and may be debilitating to her in social and work situations. Long-term personality factors identified by other scale eleva- tions may help provide a clinical context for the symptoms she is presently experiencing. She apparently holds some unusual be- liefs that appear to be disconnected from reality. Her high score on one MMPI-2 scale, the PSYC (Psychoticism) scale, suggests that she often feels alienated from others and might experience unusual symptoms such as delusional beliefs, circumstantial and tangential thinking, and loose associations. She also shows a meager capacity to experience pleasure in life. Persons with high scores on another MMPI-2 scale, the INTR (Introversion/ Low Positive Emotionality), tend to be pessimistic.  PRoFile FRequency  Profile interpretation can be greatly facilitated by examining the relative frequency of clinical scale patterns in various settings. The client’s high-point clinical scale score (D) occurred in 7.0 percent of the MMPI-2 normative sample of women. However, only 4.4 percent of the women had D scale peak scores at or above a T score of 65, and only 2.1 percent had well-defined D spikes. Her elevated MMPI-2 profile configuration (1-2/2-1) is rare in samples of normals, occurring in 1.0 percent of the MMPI-2 normative sample of women. This high-point MMPI-2 score is the most frequent clinical scale score in various samples of outpatient women. In the Pearson outpatient sample, the high-point clinical scale score on D oc- curred in 18.7 percent of the women. Moreover, 17.1 percent of the outpatient women had the D scale spike at or above a T score of 65, and 9.0 percent had well-defined D spikes. Her elevated MMPI-2 profile configuration (1-2/2-1) occurred in 2.9 percent of the women in the Pearson outpatient sample.  PRoFile STABiliTy  The relative elevation of her clinical scale scores suggests that her profile is not as well defined as many other profiles. There was no difference between the profile type used to develop the present report (involving Hs and D) and the next highest scale in the profile code. Therefore, behavioral elements related to elevations on Pt should be considered as well. For example, intensification of anxiety, negative self-image, and unproductive rumination could be important in her symptom pattern.  inTeRPeRSonAl RelATionS  She appears to be somewhat passive-dependent in relation- ships. She may manipulate others through her physical symp- toms, and she may become hostile if sufficient attention is not paid to her complaints. She is a very introverted person who has difficulty meeting and interacting with other people. She is shy and emotionally distant. She tends to be very uneasy, rigid, and overcontrolled in social situations. Her shyness is probably symptomatic of a broader pattern of social withdrawal. Personality characteristics related to social introversion tend to be stable over time. Her generally re- clusive behavior, introverted lifestyle, and tendency toward inter- personal avoidance may be prominent in any future test results. The client’s scores on the content scales suggest the following additional information concerning her interpersonal relations. She appears to be an individual who has rather cynical views about life. Any efforts to initiate new behaviors may be colored by her negativism. She may view relationships with others as threatening and harmful.  DiAGnoSTic conSiDeRATionS  Individuals with this profile type are often seen as neurotic and may receive a diagnosis of somatoform disorder. Actual organic problems such as ulcers or hypertension might be part of the clinical picture. Some individuals with this profile have problems with abuse of pain medication or other prescription drugs.  TReATmenT conSiDeRATionS  Her view of herself as physically disabled needs to be con- sidered in any treatment planning. She tends to somatize her difficulties and to seek medical solutions rather than deal with them psychologically. She seems to tolerate a high level of psy- chological conflict and may not be motivated to deal with her problems directly. She is probably not a strong candidate for psychotherapy treatment approaches that require self-scrutiny, insight development, and high motivation for change. Psycho- logical treatment may progress more rapidly if her symptoms are dealt with through behavior modification techniques. However, with her generally pessimistic attitude and low energy resources, she seems to have little hope of getting better. ( Continued )
on the Depression scale. Thus, this high Depression scale elevation is considered to be a relatively common symptom among women seeking outpatient mental health services. The reader should also note that there are some scales men- tioned in the computer narrative report for Andrea that are not listed in Table 4.1. There are a number of other MMPI-2 scales in the literature and in common use with the MMPI-2 that are not listed due to space restrictions in this book. For example, there are 15 MMPI-2 content-based scales, that is, scales that are comprised of homogeneous content themes (such as Negative Work Attitudes, Family Problems, and Type-A Behavior). These scales address specific problem themes in mental health patients. In addition, there are five scales, referred to as the Psychopathology Five (PSY-5) scales that address the personality disorder content domains that are referred to as the “Big 5” personality dimen- sions. These personality dimensions include Aggressiveness, Psy- choticism, Disconstraint, Negative Emotionality/Neuroticism, and Introversion/Low Positive Emotionality.  in review  •   Distinguish between structured and unstructured clinical assess- ment interviews.  •   What are the assumptions behind the use of projective personal- ity tests? How do they differ from objective tests?  •   What advantages do objective personality tests offer over less structured tests?  •   What is the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI- 2)? Describe how the scales work.  The Integration of Assessment Data  As assessment data are collected, their significance must be interpreted so that they can be integrated into a coherent work- ing model for use in planning. Clinicians in individual private practice normally assume this complicated task on their own. In a clinic or hospital setting, assessment data are often evaluated in a staff conference attended by members of an interdisciplinary team (perhaps consisting of a clinical psychologist, a psychiatrist, a social worker, and other mental health personnel) who are concerned with the decisions to be made regarding treatment. By putting together all the information they have gathered, they can see whether the findings complement each other and form a definitive clinical picture or whether gaps or discrepancies exist that necessitate further investigation. This integration of all the data gathered at the time of an original assessment may lead to agreement on a tentative diagnostic classification for a patient. In any case, the findings of each member of the team, as well as the recommendations for treatment, are entered into the case record so that it will always be possible to check back and see why a certain course of therapy was undertaken, how accurate the clinical assess- ment was, and how valid the treatment decision turned out to be. New assessment data collected during the course of ther- apy provide feedback on its effectiveness and serve as a basis for making needed modifications in an ongoing treatment program. As we have noted, clinical assessment data are also commonly used in evaluating the final outcome of therapy and in comparing the effectiveness of different therapeutic and pre- ventive approaches.  ethical issues in Assessment  The decisions made on the basis of assessment data may have far-reaching implications for the people involved. A staff deci- sion may determine whether a severely depressed person will be hospitalized or remain with her or his family, or whether an accused person will be declared competent to stand trial. Thus a  The client’s scores on the content scales seem to indicate low potential for change. She may feel that her problems are not addressable through therapy and that she is not likely to benefit much from psychological treatment at this time. Her apparently negative treatment attitudes may need to be explored early in therapy if treatment is to be successful. She harbors many negative work attitudes that could limit her adaptability in the workplace. Her low morale and lack of inter- est in work could impair future adjustment to employment, a factor that should be taken into consideration in treatment. Source: Excerpted from   The Minnesota Report ™ : Adult Clinical System-Revised , 4th Edition by James N. Butcher. In a clinic or hospital setting, assessment data are usually evaluated in a staff conference attended by members of an interdisciplinary team— including, for example, a clinical psychologist, a psychiatrist, a social worker, and a psychiatric nurse. A staff decision may determine whether a severely depressed person will be hospitalized or remain with his or her family or whether an accused person will be declared competent to stand trial. Because these decisions can have such great impact on the lives of the clients, it is critical that clinicians be well aware of the limitations of assessment.
valid decision, based on accurate assessment data, is of far more than theoretical importance. Because of the impact that assess- ment can have on the lives of others, it is important that those involved keep several factors in mind in evaluating test results: 1.   Potential Cultural Bias of the Instrument or the Clinician:   There is the possibility that some psychological tests may not elicit valid information for a patient from a minority group (Gray-Little, 2009; Wen-Shing & Streltzer, 2008). A clinician from one sociocultural background may have trouble assessing objectively the behavior of someone from another background. It is important to ensure—as Greene, Robin, Albaugh, Caldwell, and Goldman (2003) and Hall, Bansal, and Lopez (1999) have shown with the MMPI-2—that the instrument can be confidently used with persons from minority groups. 2.   Theoretical Orientation of the Clinician:   Assessment is in- evitably influenced by a clinician’s assumptions, perceptions, and theoretical orientation. For example, a psychoanalyst and a behaviorist might assess the same behaviors quite dif- ferently. The psychoanalytically oriented professional is likely to view behaviors as reflecting underlying motives, whereas the behavioral clinician is likely to view the behaviors in the context of the immediate or preceding stimulus situations. Different treatment recommendations are likely to result. 3.   Underemphasis on the External Situation:   Many clinicians overemphasize personality traits as the cause of patients’ problems without paying enough attention to the possible role of stressors and other circumstances in the patients’ life situations. An undue focus on a patient’s personality, which some assessment techniques encourage, can divert attention from potentially critical environmental factors. 4.   Insufficient Validation:   Some psychological assessment pro- cedures in use today have not been sufficiently validated. For example, unlike many of the personality scales, widely used procedures for behavioral observation and behavioral self- report and the projective techniques have not been subjected to strict psychometric validation. 5.   Inaccurate Data or Premature Evaluation:   There is always the possibility that some assessment data—and any diagnostic label or treatment based on them—may be inaccurate or that the team leader (usually a psychiatrist) might choose to ignore test data in favor of other information. Some risk is always in- volved in making predictions for an individual on the basis of group data or averages. Inaccurate data or premature conclu- sions may not only lead to a misunderstanding of a patient’s problem but also close off attempts to get further information, with possibly grave consequences for the patient.  in review  •   What are some ethical issues that clinicians should be aware of when evaluating a patient’s test results?  •   Are there concerns over cultural biases in some psychological tests?  •   What is test validity?  Classifying Abnormal Behavior  Classification is important in any science, whether we are study- ing chemical elements, plants, planets, or people. With an agreed-upon classification system we can be confident that we are communicating clearly. If someone says to you, “I saw a dog running down the street,” you can probably produce a mental image broadly approximating the appearance of that dog—not from seeing it but rather from your knowledge of animal clas- sifications. There are of course many breeds of dogs, which vary widely in size, color, muzzle length, and so on, and yet we have little difficulty in recognizing the essential features of “dogness.” “Dogness” is an example of what psychologists refer to as a “cog- nitive prototype” or “pattern.” In abnormal psychology, classification involves the attempt to delineate meaningful subvarieties of maladaptive behavior. Like defining abnormal behavior, classification of some kind is a necessary first step toward introducing order into our discussion of the nature, causes, and treatment of such behavior. Classifica- tion makes it possible to communicate about particular clusters of abnormal behavior in agreed-upon and relatively precise ways. For example, we cannot conduct research on what might cause eating disorders unless we begin with a more or less clear definition of the behavior under examination; otherwise, we would be unable to select, for intensive study, persons whose behavior displays the aberrant eating patterns we hope to understand. There are other reasons for diagnostic classifications, too, such as gathering statistics on how common the various types of disorders are and meeting the needs of medical insurance companies (which insist on having formal diagnoses before they will authorize payment of claims). Keep in mind that, just as with the process of defining abnor- mality itself, all classification is the product of human invention— it is, in essence, a matter of making generalizations based on what has been observed. Even when observations are precise and carefully made, the generalizations we arrive at go beyond those observations and enable us to make inferences about underlying similarities and differences. For example, it is common for people experiencing episodes of panic to feel they are about to die. When “panic” is carefully delineated, we find that it is not in fact associ- ated with any enhanced risk of death but, rather, that the people experiencing such episodes tend to share certain other characteris- tics, such as recent exposure to highly stressful events. It is not unusual for a classification system to be an ongoing work in progress as new knowledge demonstrates an earlier gen- eralization to be incomplete or flawed. It is important to bear in mind, too, that formal classification is successfully accomplished only through precise techniques of psychological, or clinical, assessment—techniques that have been increasingly refined over the years.
Differing models of classification  There are currently three basic approaches to classifying abnormal behavior: the categorical, the dimensional, and the prototypal (Widiger & Boyd, 2009). The categorical approach, like the diagnostic system of general medical diseases, assumes (1) that all human behavior can be divided into the categories of “healthy” and “disordered,” and (2) that within the latter there exist discrete, nonoverlapping classes or types of disorder that have a high degree of within-class homogeneity in both symptoms displayed and the underlying organization of the disorder identified.  THe DimenSionAl APPRoAcH   The dimensional and proto- typal approaches differ fundamentally in the assumptions they make, particularly with respect to the requirement of discrete and internally homogeneous classes of behavior. In the dimen- sional approach, it is assumed that a person’s typical behavior is the product of differing strengths or intensities of behavior along several definable dimensions such as mood, emotional stability, aggressiveness, gender identity, anxiousness, interpersonal trust, clarity of thinking and communication, social introversion, and so on. The important dimensions, once established, are the same for everyone. People are assumed to differ from one another in their configuration or profile of these dimensional traits (each ranging from very low to very high), not in terms of behavioral indica- tions of a corresponding “dysfunctional” entity presumed to un- derlie and give rise to the disordered pattern of behavior (Miller, Reynolds, & Pilkonis, 2004; Widiger et al., 2006). “Normal” is discriminated from “abnormal,” then, in terms of precise statisti- cal criteria derived from dimensional intensities among unselected people in general, most of whom may be presumed to be close to average, or mentally “normal.” We could decide, for example, that anything above the 97th normative percentile on aggressiveness and anything below the 3rd normative percentile on sociability would be considered “abnormal” findings. Dimensionally based diagnosis has the incidental benefit of directly addressing treatment options. Because the patient’s pro- file of psychological characteristics will normally consist of devi- antly high and low points, therapies can be designed to moderate those of excessive intensity (e.g., anxiety) and to enhance those that constitute deficit status (e.g., inhibited self-assertiveness). Of course, in taking a dimensional approach, it would be possible (perhaps even probable) to discover that such profiles tend to cluster together in types—and even that some of these types are correlated, though imperfectly, with recognizable sorts of gross behavioral malfunctions such as anxiety disorders or depression. It is highly unlikely, however, that any individual’s profile will exactly fit a narrowly defined type or that the types identified will not have some overlapping features. This brings us to the prototypal approach.  THe PRoToTyPAl APPRoAcH   A prototype (as the term is used here) is a conceptual entity (e.g., personality disorder) de- picting an idealized combination of characteristics that more or less regularly occur together in a less-than-perfect or standard way at the level of actual observation. Westen, Shedler, and Bradley (2006), for example, suggest that the   DSM   should pro- vide a narrative description of a prototypic case of each personal- ity disorder rather than having a listing of diagnostic criteria as it now has. The diagnostician could indicate on a 5-point scale the extent to which a patient matches this description. The clinician would simply rate the overall similarity or “match” between a patient and the prototype. As we shall see, the official diagnostic criteria defining the various recognized classes of mental disorder, although explicitly intended to create categorical entities, more often than not result in prototypal ones. The central features of the various identi- fied disorders are often somewhat vague, as are the boundaries purporting to separate one disorder from another. Much evi- dence suggests that a strict categorical approach to identifying differences among types of human behavior, whether normal or abnormal, may well be an unattainable goal. Bearing this in mind as we proceed may help you avoid some confusion. For example, we commonly find that two or more identified disor- ders regularly occur together in the same individual—a situation known as   comorbidity . Does this really mean that such a person has two or more entirely separate and distinct disorders? In the typical instance, probably not.  Formal Diagnostic classification of mental Disorders  Today, there are two major psychiatric classification systems in use: the   International Classification of Disease   (ICD-10) system, published by the World Health Organization, and the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders   ( DSM ), published by the American Psychiatric Association. The ICD-10 system is widely used in Europe and many other countries, whereas the  DSM   system is the standard guide for the United States. Both systems are similar in many respects, such as in using symptoms as the focus of classification and in dividing problems into differ- ent facets (to be described in the section that follows). Certain differences in the way symptoms are grouped in these two systems can sometimes result in a different classifica- tion on the   DSM   than on the ICD-10. We will focus on the  DSM   system in our discussion of what is to be considered a mental disorder. This manual specifies what subtypes of mental disorders are currently officially recognized and provides, for each, a set of defining criteria in the United States and some other countries. As already noted, the system purports to be a categorical one with sharp boundaries separating the various dis- orders from one another, but it is in fact a prototypal one with much fuzziness of boundaries and considerable interpenetration, or overlap, of the various “categories” of disorder it identifies. The criteria that define the recognized categories of disor- der consist for the most part of symptoms and signs. The term  symptoms   generally refers to the patient’s subjective description,
the complaints she or he presents about what is wrong.   Signs , on the other hand, are objective observations that the diagnosti- cian may make either directly (such as the patient’s inability to look another person in the eye) or indirectly (such as the results of pertinent tests administered by a psychological examiner). To make any given diagnosis, the diagnostician must observe the particular criteria—the symptoms and signs that the   DSM   indi- cates must be met.  The evoluTion of The   DSM   The DSM is currently in its fifth edition ( DSM-5 ), published in 2013 after considerable de- bate and controversy. This system is the product of more than a six-decade evolution involving increasing refinement and preci- sion in the identification and description of mental disorders. The first edition of the manual ( DSM-I ) appeared in 1952 and was largely an outgrowth of attempts to standardize diagnostic practices in use among military personnel in World War II. The 1968   DSM-II   reflected the additional insights gleaned from a markedly expanded postwar research effort in mental health sponsored by the federal government. Over time, practitioners recognized a defect in both these early efforts: The various types of disorders identified were described in narrative and jargon- laden terms that proved too vague for mental health profession- als to agree on their meaning. The result was a serious limitation of diagnostic reliability; that is, two professionals examining the same patient might very well come up with completely different impressions of what disorder(s) the patient had.   DSM-III   (1980) and   DSM-IV-TR   (2000) provided further modification and elaboration of disorders with efforts to make the diagnostic clas- sification clearer.   DSM-5 , published in 2013, incorporated more theoretical shifts in diagnostic thinking for many years and has been the most controversial alteration to diagnostic thinking to date. To address this clinical and scientific impasse, the   DSM-III  of 1980 introduced a radically different approach, one intended to remove, as much as possible, the element of subjective judg- ment from the diagnostic process. It did so by adopting an “operational” method of defining the various disorders that would officially be recognized. This innovation meant that the  DSM   system would now specify the exact observations that must be made for a given diagnostic label to be applied. In a typical case, a specific number of signs or symptoms from a designated list must be present before a diagnosis can properly be assigned. The new approach, continued in the   DSM-III’ s revised ver- sion of 1987 ( DSM-III-R ) and in the 1994   DSM-IV , clearly enhanced diagnostic reliability and made efforts to incorporate cultural and ethnic considerations. As an example of the opera- tional approach to diagnosis in   DSM-5 , the diagnostic criteria for Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthemia) (see Chapter 7) are reproduced in the box below. Note that the revised diagnos- tic system combines diagnostic criteria from two diagnoses from  DSM-IV : Chronic Major Depression and Dysthymic Disorder.  This disorder represents a consolidation of DSM-IV-defined chronic major depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder.  A.   Depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, as indicated by either subjective account or observation by others, for at least 2 years.  Note:   In children and adolescents, mood can be irritable and duration must be at least 1 year.  B.   Presence, while depressed, of two (or more) of the following:  1.   Poor appetite or overeating.  2.   Insomnia or hypersomnia.  3.   Low energy or fatigue.  4.   Low self-esteem.  5.   Poor concentration or difficulty making decisions.  6.   Feelings of hopelessness.  C.   During the 2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents) of the disturbance, the individual has never been without the symptoms in Criteria A and B for more than 2 months at a time.  D.   Criteria for a major depressive disorder may be continuously present for 2 years.  e.   There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode, and criteria have never been met for cyclothymic disorder.  f.   The disturbance is not better explained by a persistent schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, delusional disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.  G.   The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g. hypothyroidism).  h.   The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  Note:   Because the criteria for a major depressive episode include four symptoms that are absent from the symptom list for persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), a very limited number of individuals will have depressive symptoms that have persisted longer than 2 years but will not meet criteria for persistent depressive disorder. If full criteria for a major depres- sive episode have been met at some point during the current episode of illness, they should be given a diagnosis of major depressive disorder. Otherwise, a diagnosis of other speci- fied depressive disorder or unspecified depressive disorder is warranted.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia)   DSM- 5
The number of recognized mental disorders has increased enormously from   DSM-I   to   DSM-5   due both to the addition of new diagnoses and to the elaborate subdivision of older ones. Because it is unlikely that the nature of the American psyche has changed much in the interim period, it seems more reasonable to assume that mental health professionals view their field in a different light than they did 50 years ago. The   DSM   system is now both more comprehensive and more finely differentiated into subsets of disorders. Most diagnostic categories in   DSM-5  contain a listing of Subtypes and Specifiers that allow the diag- nostician to further refine the diagnosis in order to provide more specific subgroupings of patients.  GenDeR DiFFeRenceS in DiAGnoSiS.   In the origin and manifestation of mental health symptoms, gender differences have long been noted for some disorders. Some disorders show a higher prevalence rate for male patients (such as antisocial personality) than females; other disorders (such as anorexia) are more prominently found in females. Moreover, males and females who are diagnosed with the same disorder (such as conduct disorder) often show different symptom patterns. Males have a higher rate of fighting and aggression and females have a greater tendency to lie, being truant from school and tend to run away from home. The   DSM-5   allows for gender related differences to be incorporated into the diagnosis.  APPRAiSAl oF culTuRAl BAckGRounD in   DSM-5 .   The United States is a highly diverse society that is comprised of peo- ple from multiple language and cultural backgrounds. Increas- ingly today, mental health practitioners find themselves engaged in a diagnostic evaluation of a client from a diverse background and with marginal or limited English language skill. The client’s ethnicity and cultural background, level of English language comprehension, religious background and the extent of their ac- climation to the United States can result in incorrect appraisal of mental health symptoms. People who have not been acculturated to the environment in which they live can appear more psycho- logically disturbed on tests and interviews than they actually are (Okazaki, Okazaki, & Sue, 2009). It is extremely important for the clinician to carefully appraise the client’s background, including the values and attitudes they might bring to the inter- view, in order to reduce negative impact on the decision process. The   DSM-5   provides a structured interview that focuses upon the patient’s approach to problems. The Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI) contains sixteen questions that the practitioner can use to obtain information during a mental health assessment about the potential impact the client’s culture can have on mental health care. The interview questions inquire about the patient’s perspectives on their present problems, how they perceive the influence of others in influencing their prob- lems, and ways in which their cultural background can influence their adjustment. Moreover, the interview inquires into what the patient’s experiences have been in seeking treatment for their problems. The interview questions attempt to obtain the client’s perspective without typecasting their problems.  THe PRoBlem oF lABelinG   The psychiatric diagnoses of the sort typified by the   DSM   system are not uniformly revered among mental health professionals (e.g., MacCulloch, 2010; Sarbin, 1997). One important criticism is that a psychiatric di- agnosis is little more than a label applied to a defined category of socially disapproved or otherwise problematic behavior. The diagnostic label describes neither a person nor any underlying pathological condition (“dysfunction”) the person necessarily harbors but, rather, some behavioral pattern associ- ated with that person’s current level of functioning. Yet once a label has been assigned, it may close off further inquiry. It is all too easy—even for professionals—to accept a label as an accurate and complete description of an individual rather than of that person’s current behavior. When a person is labeled “depressed” or “schizophrenic,” others are more likely to make certain assumptions about that person that may or may not be accurate. In fact, a diagnostic label can make it hard to look at the per- son’s behavior objectively, without preconceptions about how he or she will act. These expectations can influence even clini- cally important interactions and treatment choices. For example, arrival at the diagnosis “persistent depressive disorder” may cut off any further inquiry about the patient’s life situation and lead abruptly to a prescription for antidepressant medication (Tucker, 1998), or the application of a label such as “borderline personal- ity” might cause the mental health treatment staff to be less opti- mistic about the patient’s prognosis (Markham, 2003). Once an individual is labeled, he or she may accept a rede- fined identity and play out the expectations of that role. (“I’m nothing but a substance abuser. I might as well do drugs—every- one expects me to anyway. Also, this is a condition deemed out of my control, so it is pointless for me to be an active participant in my treatment.”) This acquisition of a new social identity can be harmful for a variety of reasons. The pejorative and stigmatizing implications of many psychiatric labels can mark people as second- class citizens with severe limitations that are often presumed to be permanent (Link, 2001; Slovenko, 2001). They can also have dev- astating effects on a person’s morale, self-esteem, and relationships with others. The person so labeled may decide that he or she “is” the diagnosis and may thus adopt it as a life “career.” Clearly, it is in the person with the disorder’s best interests for mental health professionals to be circumspect in the diagnos- tic process, in their use of labels, and in ensuring confidentiality with respect to both. A related change has developed over the past 50 years: For years the traditional term for a person who goes to see a mental health professional was patient, a term that is closely associated with medical sickness and a passive stance, waiting (patiently) for the doctor’s cure. Today many mental health professionals, especially those trained in nonmedical set- tings, prefer the term client because it implies greater participa- tion on the part of an individual and more responsibility for
bringing about his or her own recovery. We shall be using these terms interchangeably in this text.  limiTeD uSeFulneSS oF DiAGnoSiS   It should be kept in mind that a   DSM   diagnosis per se may be of limited usefulness. Arriving at a diagnosis is usually required, at least in the form of a “diagnostic impression,” before the commencement of clini- cal services. This is necessitated, perhaps unwisely, by medical insurance requirements and long-standing clinical administra- tive tradition. The additional information required for adequate clinical assessment may be extensive and extremely difficult to unearth. For the most part, in keeping with psychiatric tradi- tion, that process is interview based. That is, the examiner en- gages the patient (or perhaps a family member of the patient) in a conversation designed to elicit the information necessary to place the patient in one or more   DSM   diagnostic categories. The interviewer introduces various questions and probes, typically becoming increasingly specific as she or he develops diagnostic hypotheses and checks them out with additional probes related to the criteria for particular   DSM   diagnoses. Physicians in general medical practice do something similar in the course of an examination.  DSM- 5  ThInkIng CRITICAlly about DSM-5  Completion does not assure acceptance  T he development of   DSM-5   was an arduous task, initiated in 2007 by the American Psychiatric Association. The revi- sion program involved obtaining substantial input from numerous mental health professionals, both practitioners and researchers, before it was completed. Although many aspects the   DSM-IV-TR   were continued in the   DSM-5   because of their clarity and broad acceptance, some categories were modified, moved to different locations in the system, or even dropped. Moreover, a number of new diagnostic criteria were added. Prior to the May 2013 release of   DSM-5 , numerous articles and books were published detailing problems with the new system (e.g., Alarcón et al., 2009; Batstra & Frances; Frances, 2010a, 2010b; Jones, 2012; Greenberg, 2013; Insel, 2013; Kirk, et al., 2013; Kornstein, 2010). A number of   DSM-5   critics have com- plained, for example, that the American Psychiatric Association (APA) was overly secretive in the development process and failed to obtain and use critical viewpoints of diagnostic experts in their process of modifying the   DSM-IV . In his recent publica- tion entitled “The Book of Woe,” Greenberg (2013) details the backstage working of the APA, the   DSM-5   committee, and their critics in the   DSM   revision process. Greenberg is highly critical of the APA’s management of the revision process and presents a very skeptical view of psychiatry’s lack of understanding for diagnosing and curing mental health problems, pointing out that psychiatry does not understand the differences between sickness and health. He provides a lengthy description of the contrary views of the   DSM-5   and the views of many critics about the resulting diagnostic manual. For example, he expresses concerns of over-diagnosis of some disorders such as bipolar disorder, expansion of ADHD into adulthood that would likely increase substance abuse problems, and the inclusion of normal behavior such as a natural grief after the death of a loved one in the diagnosis of depression. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), has rejected the use of   DSM-5   in its research studies on mental illness and has re- oriented its diagnostic focus away from using   DSM   categories in future research studies (Insel, 2013.) In order to obtain a clearer grouping of underlying causal physical factors in mental illness, the NIMH has undertaken a different approach to categorizing mental health patients in federally sponsored research in lieu of   DSM   categories—the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC). This approach to categorizing patients in research studies attempts to use, instead of interview/history based symptoms that are employed in   DSM , objective data from genetics, imaging and cognitive science as a basis for the new classification system. Over the past two years, NIMH, through a series of workshops, has attempted to define several major categories for a new classification system for mental health disorders that are biologi- cally based conditions. The RDoC is a system of categories that allow for the collection of genetic, imaging, physiologic, and cognitive data to determine how these variables are related to mental health treatment effects. The RDoC is not recommended for use in clinical assessment but for federally funded research programs. The diagnostic criteria for mental disorders in the   DSM   are not viewed by most mental health professionals as fixed-component systems but as workable criteria that evolve and develop to accommodate new research and practical developments. The periodic remaking of   DSM   is never a smooth transition, but the resulting system can be, nevertheless, a valuable conceptual guide that provides an agreed-upon language that students, practitioners, and researchers can employ to enable clear communication about mental disorders. Even critics of   DSM-5 , Frances and Widiger (2012), pointed out that the   DSM   system is “imperfect, but it is indispensable.” In this book, our goal is not to condemn or to champion the re- vised diagnostic manual but to provide a comprehensive review and evaluation of research and clinical information about men- tal health problems. We do include in the following chapters a number of   DSM-5   category descriptions and the recommended diagnostic criteria in order to illustrate current thinking about the diagnoses underlying mental health conditions.
unSTRucTuReD DiAGnoSTic inTeRViewS   Like the as- sessment interviews described earlier, diagnostic interviews are of two general types: unstructured and structured. In the un- structured interview, the examiner follows no preexisting plan with respect to content and sequence of the probes introduced. Unstructured interviews, as their name implies, are somewhat freewheeling. The therapist/clinician asks questions as they occur to him or her, in part on the basis of the responses to previous questions. For example, if the patient/client mentions a father who traveled a lot when he or she was a child, the clinician is free to ask, “Did you miss your father?” or (pursuing a differ- ent tack), “How did your mother handle that?” rather than being required to ask the next question in a predetermined list. Many clinical examiners prefer this unfettered approach because it enables them to follow perhaps idiosyncratic “leads.” In the above example, the clinician might have chosen to ask about the mother’s reaction on the basis of a developing suspicion that the mother may have been depressed during the client’s childhood years. There is one serious drawback to the freewheeling style, however: The information that an interview yields is limited to the content of that interview. Should another clinician conduct another unstructured interview of the same patient, he or she might come up with a different clinical picture.  STRucTuReD DiAGnoSTic inTeRViewS   The structured interview probes the client in a manner that is highly controlled (Daniel & Gurczynski, 2010). Guided by a sort of master plan (sometimes to the extent of specifying the examiner’s exact wording), the clinician using a structured interview typically seeks to discover whether the person’s symptoms and signs “fit” diagnostic criteria that are more precise and “operational” than in the past. The use of more precise criteria and of highly structured diagnostic interviewing has substantially improved diagnostic reliability, but the structured interview format is still used only sporadically in routine clinical work. Nevertheless, the precision of clinical research, including epidemiological re- search to be discussed later, has profited enormously from these developments. There are a number of structured diagnostic interviews that may be used in various contexts. In clinical and research situa- tions, a popular instrument has been the Structured Clinical Interview for   DSM   Diagnosis (SCID), which yields, almost automatically, diagnoses carefully attuned to the   DSM   diagnostic criteria. Another structured diagnostic instrument, the Schedules for Clinical Assessment in Neuropsychiatry (SCAN), published by the World Health Organization (1994), enables the diagnos- tician to arrive at either an ICD-10 or a   DSM-5   diagnosis.  in review  •   Why is a classification system needed in abnormal psychology?  •   What is the meaning of reliability and validity in the context of such a classification system?  •   What is the difference between dimensional and prototypal clas- sification strategies?  •   Describe the differences between structured and unstructured diagnostic interviews.  4.1   what are the basic elements in assessment?  •   Clinical assessment is one of the most important and complex responsibilities of mental health professionals. The extent to which a person’s problems are understood and appropriately treated depends largely on the adequacy of the psychological assessment.  •   The goals of psychological assessment include identifying and describing the individual’s symptoms; determining the chronic- ity and severity of the problems; evaluating the potential causal factors in the person’s background; and exploring the individual’s personal resources that might be an asset in his or her treatment program.  4.2   what is involved in the assessment of the physical organism?  •   Because many psychological problems have physical components, either as underlying causal factors or as symptom patterns, it is often important to include a medical examination in the psycho- logical assessment.  •   In cases where organic brain damage is suspected, it is important to have neurological tests—such as an EEG; a CAT, PET, or MRI scan; or an fMRI—to help determine the site and extent of organic brain disorder.  •   For someone with suspected organic brain damage, a battery of neuropsychological tests might be recommended to determine whether or in what manner the underlying brain disorder is affecting her or his mental and behavioral capabilities.  4.3   what is psychosocial assessment?  •   Psychosocial assessment methods are techniques for gathering psy- chological information relevant to clinical decisions about patients.  4   summary
key terms  actuarial procedures   116  aphasia   107  Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS)   110  clinical diagnosis   101  comorbidity   122  computerized axial tomography (cAT) scan   105  cultural competence   103  dysrhythmia   105  electroencephalogram (eeG)   105  forensic   114  functional mRi (fmRi)   106  intelligence test   111  magnetic resonance imaging (mRi)   106  minnesota multiphasic Personal- ity inventory (mmPi)   114  neuropsychological assessment   107  objective personality tests   114  personality tests   112  positron emission tomography (PeT) scan   106  presenting problem   101  projective personality tests   112  psychological assessment   101  rating scales   109  reliability   104  role-playing   109  Rorschach inkblot Test   112  self-monitoring   109  sentence completion test   113  signs   123  standardization   104  structured assessment interview   108  symptoms   122  T score distribution   104  Thematic Apperception Test (TAT)   113  unstructured assessment interviews   109  validity   104  •   The most widely used and most flexible psychosocial assessment methods are the clinical interview and behavior observation. These methods provide a wealth of clinical information.  •   Psychological tests include standardized stimuli for collecting behavior samples that can be compared with other individuals’ behavior via test norms. Examples include intelligence and per- sonality tests.  •   Two different personality-testing approaches have evolved: (1) projective tests, such as the Rorschach or the TAT, in which unstructured stimuli are presented to a subject, who then “proj- ects” meaning or structure onto the stimulus, thereby revealing “hidden” motives, feelings, and so on; and (2) objective tests, or personality inventories, in which a subject is required to read and respond to itemized statements or questions.  •   Objectively scored personality tests, such as the MMPI-2 and MMPI-A, provide a cost-effective means of collecting a great deal of personality information rapidly.  4.4   How do practitioners integrate assessment data?  •   Possibly the most valuable recent innovation in clinical assessment involves the widespread use of computers in the administration, scoring, and interpretation of psychological tests. It is now pos- sible to obtain immediate interpretation of psychological test results, either through a direct computer interactive approach or through an Internet hookup.  4.5   what is the process for classifying abnormal behavior?  •   The formal definition of mental disorder, as offered in the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM-5 ), has certain problems that limit its clarity and results in controversy.  •   There are problems with the category type of classification system adopted in   DSM-5 . Notably, the categories do not always result in within-class homogeneity or between-class discrimination. This can lead to high levels of comorbidity among disorders.  •   The changes in the diagnostic system has prompted extensive criticism.  •   For all of its problems, however, knowledge of the   DSM-5   is essential to serious study in the field of abnormal behavior.
learning objectives  5.1  What is stress?  5.2  How does the body respond to stress?  5.3  What role does our emotional state play in our physical health?  5.4  What mental disorders are explicitly recognized as being triggered by stress?  5.5  What are the clinical features of posttraumatic stress disorder?  5.6  What are the risk factors for PTSD?  5.7  What treatment approaches are used for PTSD?  With its deadlines, interpersonal tensions, financial pressures, and everyday hassles, daily life places many demands on us. We are all exposed to stress, and this exposure affects our physical and our psychological well-being. Sometimes even leisure activities can be stressful. For example, a loss in the Superbowl is followed by an increase in heart attacks and death over the following two weeks in the losing team’s city (Kloner et al., 2011). And watching a stressful soccer match more than doubles the risk of having acute cardiovas- cular problems (Wilbert-Lampen et al., 2008). How are you affected by stress? Does it make you anxious? Does it give you migraines? The field of   health psychology   is concerned with the effects of stress and other psychological factors in the develop- ment and maintenance of physical problems. Health psychology is a subspecialty within   behavioral medicine . A behavioral med- icine approach to physical illness is concerned with psychological factors that may predispose an individual to medical problems. These may include such factors as stressful life events, certain personality traits, particular coping styles, and lack of social sup- port. Within behavioral medicine there is also a focus on the effects of stress on the body, including the immune, endocrine, gastrointestinal, and cardiovascular systems. But stress affects the mind as well as the body. As we dis- cussed in Chapter 3, the role that stress can play in triggering the onset of mental disorders in vulnerable people is explicitly acknowledged in the diathesis-stress model. Moreover, expo- sure to extreme and traumatic stress may overwhelm the coping resources of otherwise apparently healthy people, leading to mental disorders such as   posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) , as in the following example.  Posttraumatic Stress in a Military Nurse  Jennifer developed PTSD after she served as a nurse in Iraq. During her deployment she worked 12- to 14-hour shifts in 120-degree temperatures. Sleep was hard to come by and disaster was routine. Day in and day out there was a never- ending flow of mangled bodies of young soldiers. Jennifer recalled one especially traumatic event: I was working one evening. We received information that a vehicle, on a routine convoy mission, had been hit by an improvised explosive device (IED). Three wounded men and one dead soldier were on their way to our hospital. Two med- ics in the back room were processing the dead soldier for Mortuary Affairs. The dead soldier was lying on a cot. The air was strong with the smell of burned flesh. I was staring at the body and trying to grasp what was different about this particular body. After a while I realized. The upper chest and head of the dead soldier was completely missing. We received his head about an hour later. (Based on Feczer & Bjorklund, 2009).  In this chapter we consider the role that stress plays in the development of physical and mental disorders. We discuss both physical and mental problems because the mind and the body are powerfully connected and because stress takes its toll on both. Although the problems that are linked to stress are many, we limit our discussion to the most severe stress-related physical and mental disorders. In the physical realm, we focus on heart disease. For mental disorders, we concern ourselves primarily with PTSD.  5  After a Superbowl loss, heart attacks and death increase in the losing team’s city.
What Is Stress?  Life would be very simple if all of our needs were automatically satisfied. In reality, however, many obstacles, both personal and environmental, get in the way. A promising athletic career may be brought to an end by injury; we may have less money than we need; we may be rejected by the person we love. The demands of life require that we adjust. When we experience or perceive chal- lenges to our physical or emotional well-being that exceed our coping resources and abilities, the psychological condition that results is typically referred to as stress (see Shalev, 2009). To avoid confusion, we will refer to external demands as   stressors , to the effects they create within the organism as   stress , and to efforts to deal with stress as   coping strategies . It is also important to note that stress is fundamentally an interactive and dynamic construct because it reflects the interaction between the organism and the environment over time (Monroe, 2008). All situations that require adjustment can be regarded as potentially stressful. Prior to the influential work of Canadian phy- sician and endocrinologist Hans Selye (1956, 1976),   stress   was a term used by engineers. Selye took the word and used it to describe the difficulties and strains experienced by living organisms as they struggled to cope with and adapt to changing environmental condi- tions. His work provided the foundation for current stress research. Selye also noted that stress could occur not only in negative situ- ations (such as taking an examination) but also in positive situa- tions (such as a wedding). Both kinds of stress can tax a person’s resources and coping skills, although bad stress ( distress ) typically has the potential to do more damage. Stress can also occur in more than one form—not just as a simple catastrophe but also as a con- tinuous force that exceeds the person’s capability of managing it.  Stress and the   DSM  The relationship between stress and psychopathology is considered so important that the role of stress is recognized in diagnostic for- mulations. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the diagnosis of PTSD—a severe disorder that we will discuss later. PTSD was classified as an anxiety disorder in DSM-IV. However, DSM-5 introduced a new diagnostic category called trauma- and stressor related disorders. PTSD is now included there. Other disorders in this new category are adjustment disorder and acute stress disorder. These disorders involve patterns of psychological and behavioral disturbances that occur in response to identifiable stressors. The key differences among them lie not only in the severity of the dis- turbances but also in the nature of the stressors and the time frame during which the disorders occur (Cardeña et al., 2003).  Factors Predisposing a Person to Stress  Everyone faces a unique pattern of demands to which he or she must adjust. This is because people perceive and interpret similar situations differently and also because, objectively, no two people are faced with exactly the same pattern of stressors. Some indi- viduals are also more likely to develop long-term problems under stress than others. This may be linked, in part, to coping skills and the presence of particular resources. Children, for example, are particularly vulnerable to severe stressors such as war and ter- rorism (Petrovic, 2004). Research also suggests that adolescents  Stress can result from both negative and positive events. Both types of stress can tax a person’s resources and coping skills, although distress (nega- tive stress) typically has the po- tential to do more damage.
with depressed parents are more sensitive to stressful events; these adolescents are also more likely to have problems with depression themselves after experiencing stressful life events than those who do not have depressed parents (Bouma et al., 2008). Individual characteristics that have been identified as improving a person’s ability to handle life stress include higher levels of optimism, greater psychological control or mastery, increased self-esteem, and better social support (Declercq et al., 2007; Taylor & Stanton, 2007). These stable factors are linked to reduced levels of distress in the face of life events as well as more favorable health outcomes. There is also some evidence from twin studies that differences in coping styles may be linked to underlying genetic differences (Jang et al., 2007). A major development in stress research was the discovery that a particular form of a particular gene (the 5HTTLPR gene) was linked to how likely it was that people would become depressed in the face of life stress. Caspi and colleagues (2003) found that people who had two “short” forms of this gene (the s/s genotype) were more likely to develop depression when they experienced four or more stressful life events than were people who had two “long” forms of this gene (the l/l geneotype). Although this specific finding was controversial for a while a recent meta-analysis has provided clear support for the original finding (Karg et al., 2011). More generally, it is now widely accepted that our genetic makeup can render us more or less “stress-sensitive.” Researchers are exploring genes that may play a role in determining how reactive to stress we are (Alexander et al., 2009; Armbruster et al., 2012). The amount of stress we experience early in life may also make us more sensitive to stress later on (Gillespie & Nemeroff, 2007; Lupien et al., 2009). The effects of stress may be cumulative, with each stress- ful experience serving to make the system more reactive. Evidence from animal studies shows that being exposed to a single stressful expe- rience can enhance responsiveness to stressful events that occur later (Johnson, O’Connor et al., 2002). Rats that were exposed to stressful tail shocks produced more of the stress hormone cortisol when they were later exposed to another stressful experience (being placed on a platform). Other biological changes associated with stress were also more pronounced in these rats. These results suggest that prior stressful experiences may sensitize us biologically, making us more reactive to later stressful experiences. The term   stress tolerance   refers to a per- son’s ability to withstand stress without becoming seriously impaired. Stressful experiences may also create a self-perpetuating cycle by changing how we think about, or appraise, the things that happen to us. Studies have shown that stressful situations may be related to or intensified by a person’s cognitions (Nixon & Bryant, 2005). This may explain why people with a history of depression tend to experience negative events as more stressful than other people do (Havermans et al., 2007). For example, if you’re feeling depressed or anxious already, you may perceive a friend’s canceling a movie date as an indication that she doesn’t want to spend time with you. Even though the reality may be that a demand in her own life has kept her from keeping your date, when you feel bad you will be much more inclined to come to a negative conclusion about what just happened rather than see the situation in a more balanced or more optimistic way. Can you think of an example in your own life when something like this has happened to you?  Characteristics of Stressors  Why is misplacing our keys so much less stressful than being in an unhappy marriage or being fired from a job? At some level we all intuitively understand what makes one stressor more seri- ous than another. The key factors involve (1) the severity of the stressor, (2) its chronicity (i.e., how long it lasts), (3) its timing, (4) how closely it affects our own lives, (5) how expected it is, and (6) how controllable it is. Stressors that involve the more important aspects of a person’s life—such as the death of a loved one, a divorce, a job loss, a seri- ous illness, or negative social exchanges—tend to be highly stressful for most people (Aldwin, 2007; Newsom et al., 2008). Further- more, the longer a stressor operates, the more severe its effects. A person may be frustrated in a boring and unrewarding job from which there is seemingly no escape, suffer for years in an unhappy and conflict-filled marriage, or be severely frustrated by a physi- cal limitation or a long-term health problem. As we have already noted, stressors also often have cumulative effects (Miller, 2007). A married couple may endure a long series of difficulties and frustra- tions, only to divorce after experiencing what might seem to be a minor precipitating stressor. Encountering a number of stressors at the same time also makes a difference. If a man loses his job, learns that his wife is seriously ill, and receives news that his son has been arrested for selling drugs, all at the same time, the resulting stress will be more severe than if these events occurred separately and over an extended period. Symptoms of stress also intensify when a person is more closely involved in an immediately traumatic situ- ation. Learning that the uncle of a close friend was injured in a car accident is not as stressful as being in an accident oneself. Extensive research has shown that events that are unpredict- able and unanticipated (and for which no previously developed coping strategies are available) are likely to place a person under severe stress. A devastating house fire and the damage it brings  A devastating house fire is not an event we can anticipate. It is almost impossible to be psychologically prepared to experience a stressor such as this.
are not occurrences with which anyone has learned to cope. Likewise, recovery from the stress created by major surgery can be improved when a patient is given realistic expectations beforehand; knowing what to expect adds predictability to the situation. In one study, patients who were about to undergo hip replacement surgery watched a 12-minute film the evening before they had the operation. The film described the entire pro- cedure from the patient’s perspective. Compared to controls who did not see the film, patients who saw the video were less anxious on the morning of the surgery, were less anxious after the sur- gery, and needed less pain medication (Doering et al., 2000). Finally, with an uncontrollable stressor, there is no way to reduce its impact, such as by escape or avoidance. In general, both people and animals are more stressed by unpredictable and uncontrollable stressors than by stressors that are of equal physi- cal magnitude but are either predictable or controllable or both (e.g., Evans & Stecker, 2004; Maier & Watkins, 1998).  The exPerienCe oF CriSiS   Most of us experience occasional periods of especially acute (sudden and intense) stress. The term  crisis   is used to refer to times when a stressful situation threat- ens to exceed or exceeds the adaptive capacities of a person or a group. Crises are often especially stressful, because the stressors are so potent that the coping techniques we typically use do not work. Stress can be distinguished from crisis in this way: A trau- matic situation or crisis overwhelms a person’s ability to cope, whereas stress does not necessarily overwhelm the person.  Measuring Life Stress  Life changes, even positive ones such as being promoted or get- ting married, place new demands on us and may therefore be stressful. The stress from life changes can trigger problems, even in disorders, such as bipolar disorder, that have strong biologi- cal underpinnings (see Johnson & Miller, 1997). The faster life changes occur, the greater the stress that is experienced. A major focus of research on life changes has concerned the measurement of life stress. Years ago, Holmes and Rahe (1967) developed the Social Readjustment Rating Scale. This is a self- report checklist of fairly common, stressful life experiences (see also Chung et al., 2010; Cooper & Dewe, 2007). Although easy to use, limitations of the checklist method later led to the develop- ment of interview-based approaches such as the Life Events and Difficulties Schedule (LEDS; Brown & Harris, 1978). One advan- tage of the LEDS is that it includes an extensive manual that pro- vides rules for rating both acute and chronic forms of stress. The LEDS system also allows raters to consider a person’s unique cir- cumstances when rating each life event. For example, if a woman who is happily married and in good financial circumstances learns that she is going to have a baby, she may experience this news in a way that is quite different from that of an unmarried teenager who is faced with the prospect of having to tell her parents that she is pregnant. Although interview-based approaches are more time consuming and costly to administer, they are considered more reli- able and are preferred for research in this area (see Monroe, 2008).  resilience  After experiencing a potentially traumatic event, some people function well and experience very few symptoms in the following weeks and months. This kind of healthy psychological and physical functioning after a potentially traumatic event is called  resilience . You might be surprised to learn that resilience is not rare. In fact, resilience is the most common reaction following loss or trauma (Bonnano et al., 2011; Quale & Schanke, 2010). But why are some people more resilient than others? Research suggests that there is no single factor that predicts resilience. Rather, resilience is linked to a variety of different characteristics and resources. Factors that increase resilience include being male, being older, and being well educated. Having more economic resources is also beneficial. Some earlier studies suggested that, after the 9/11 attacks in New York, African Americans and mem- bers of some Latino groups fared more poorly and showed lower levels of resilience compared to whites. However, race and eth- nicity are often confounded with social class. Importantly, when social class is controlled for, statistics show that race and ethnic- ity are no longer predictive of reduced resiliency. It also helps to be a positive person. Research shows that people who can still show genuine positive emotions when talking about their recent loss also tend to adjust better after bereavement (see Bonnano et al., 2011). In contrast, having more negative affect, being more inclined to ruminate, and try- ing to find meaning in what has happened is associated with people doing less well after a traumatic event. The importance of positive and negative emotions is nicely illustrated in a study of 80 people who were being treated in a spe- cialized rehabilitation hospital (Quale & Schanke, 2010). All had multiple traumatic injuries or severe spinal cord injuries, usually caused by accidents. The people who showed most resilience in  Unpredictable and uncontrollable events cause the greatest stress. These people are reacting to the collapse of the World Trade Center towers.
the months after their injuries were those who, when interviewed shortly after arriving in the hospital, reported that they generally had an optimistic approach to life. In addition to optimism, being generally high on positive affect and low on negative affect also predicted having a more resilient trajectory (as opposed to a dis- tress trajectory) over the period of rehabilitation treatment. Finally, it is interesting to note that people who are very self- confident and who view themselves in an overly positive light also tend to cope remarkably well in the face of trauma. Although peo- ple with this kind of self-enhancing style are sometimes unpleasant to interact with, such a style may serve them well in times of crisis. For example, in a recent prospective study, Gupta and Bonanno (2010) showed that college students with this self-enhancing style coped much better over a four-year period than people who did not.  in review  •   What factors play a role in determining a person’s stress tolerance?  •   What characteristics of stressors make them more serious and more difficult to adapt to?  •   Describe two methods that can be used to measure life stress.  •   What is resilience? Describe three factors that increase resilience and three factors that are associated with reduced resilience.  Stress and the Stress Response  To understand why stress can lead to physical and psychological problems, we need to know what happens to our bodies when we experience stress. Faced with the threat of a perceived stressor, the body undergoes a cascade of biological changes. Two distinct systems are involved here. The   sympathetic-adrenomedullary (SAM) system   (see Gunnar & Quevedo, 2007) is designed to mobilize resources and prepare for a fight-or-flight response. The stress response begins in the hypothalamus, which stimu- lates the sympathetic nervous system (SNS). This, in turn, causes the inner portion of the adrenal glands (the adrenal medulla) to secrete adrenaline (epinephrine) and noradrenaline (norepinephrine). As these circulate through the blood, they cause an increase in heart rate (familiar to all of us). They also get the body to metabolize glucose more rapidly. The second system involved in the stress response is called the   hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) system   (which we introduced in Chapter 3; also see Figure 5.1). In addition to stimulating the SNS, the hypothalamus releases a hormone called “corticotrophin-releasing hormone” (or CRH). Traveling in the blood, this hormone stimulates the pituitary gland. The pituitary then secretes adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH). This induces the adrenal cortex (the outer portion of the adrenal gland) to produce the stress hormones called glucocorticoids. In humans, the stress glucocorticoid that is produced is called  cortisol . Figure 5.1 illustrates this sequence of events. Cortisol is a good hormone to have around in an emergency. It prepares the body for fight or flight. It also inhibits the innate immune response. This means that if an injury does occur, the body’s inflammatory response to it is delayed. In other words, escape has priority over healing, and tissue repair is secondary to staying alive. This obviously has survival value if you need to run away from a lion that has just mauled you. It also explains why cortisone injec- tions are sometimes used to reduce inflammation in damaged joints. But there is also a downside to cortisol. If the corti- sol response is not shut off, cortisol can damage brain cells,  Resilience is the most common response to a potentially traumatic event. Optimism, positive emotions, and having more economic resources are all predictive of resilience.  Anterior pituitary Hypothalamus Adrenal cortex ACTH (through bloodstream) Cortisol CRH (through bloodstream)  figure   5.1  The hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal (hPA) Axis.   Prolonged stress leads to secretion of the adrenal hormone cortisol, which elevates blood sugar and increases metabolism. These changes help the body sustain pro- longed activity but at the expense of decreased immune system activity.  Explore Explore   the   simulation   LivePsych! Stress and Immune System  on   MyPsychLab .
especially in the hippocampus (see Sapolsky, 2000). At a very fundamental level, stress is bad for your brain. It may even stunt growth (babies who are stressed don’t gain weight in the normal way and “fail to thrive”). Accord- ingly, the brain has receptors to detect cor- tisol. When these are activated, they send a feedback message that is designed to dampen the activity of the glands involved in the stress response. But if the stressor remains, the HPA axis stays active and cortisol release continues. Although short-term cortisol production is highly adaptive, a chronically overactive HPA axis, with high levels of cir- culating cortisol, may be problematic.  Biological Costs of Stress  The biological cost of adapting to stress is called the   allostatic load   (McEwan, 1998). When we are relaxed and not experiencing stress, our allostatic load is low. When we are stressed and feeling pressured, our allostatic load will be higher. Although efforts to relate specific stressors to specific medical problems have not generally been successful, stress is becoming a key underlying theme in our understanding of the development and course of virtually all physical illness. Moreover, the focus now is not just on major stressors such as job loss or the death of a loved one, but also on daily stressors such as commuting, unexpected work deadlines, or even computer problems (Almeida, 2005). For example, a person with allergies may find his or her resistance further lowered by emotional tension. Similarly, when a virus has already entered a person’s body—as is thought to be the case in multiple sclerosis— emotional stress may interfere with the body’s normal defensive forces or immune system. In like manner, any stress may tend to aggravate and maintain certain disorders, such as migraine head- aches (Levor et al., 1986) and rheumatoid arthritis (Affleck et al., 1994; Keefe et al., 2002).  The Mind–Body Connection  The link between stress and physical illness involves diseases (like colds) that are not directly related to nervous system activity. This suggests that stress may cause an overall vulner- ability to disease by compromising immune functioning.  Psychoneuroimmunology   is the study of the interaction between the nervous system and the immune system. Although it was once thought that the immune system was essentially “closed” and responsive only to challenges from foreign sub- stances, we now realize that this is not the case. The nervous system and the immune system communicate in ways that we are now beginning to understand. Evidence continues to grow that the brain influences the immune system and that the immune system influences the brain. In other words, a person’s behavior and psychological states do indeed affect immune functioning, but the status of the immune system also influences current mental states and behavioral dispositions by affecting the blood levels of circulat- ing neurochemicals; these, in turn, modify brain states. For example, we have already seen that glucocorticoids can cause stress-induced   immunosuppression . In the short term, this can be adaptive (escape first, heal later). However, it makes sense that longer-term stress might create problems for the immune system. To appreciate why this might be, we need to describe briefly the basics of immune functioning.  Understanding the immune System  The word   immune   comes from the Latin   immunis , which means “exempt.” The   immune system   protects the body from such things as viruses and bacteria. It has been likened to a police force (Kalat, 2001). If it is too weak, it cannot function effectively, and the body succumbs to damage from invading viruses and bacteria. Conversely, if the immune system is too strong and unselective, it can turn on the body’s own healthy cells. This is what may happen in the case of autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus. The front line of defense in the immune system is the white blood cells. These   leukocytes   (or   lymphocytes ) are produced in the bone marrow and then stored in various places throughout the body, such as the spleen and the lymph nodes. There are two important types of leukocytes. One type, called a   B-cell   (because it matures in the bone marrow) produces specific antibodies that are designed to respond to specific anti- gens.   Antigens   (the word is a contraction of   antibody genera- tor ) are foreign bodies such as viruses and bacteria, as well as internal invaders such as tumors and cancer cells. The second important type of leukocyte is the   T-cell   (so named because it matures in the thymus, which is an important endocrine gland). When the immune system is stimulated, B-cells and  When we are relaxed and calm, our allostatic load is low.  When our allostatic load is high, we experience the biological signs of stress including high heart rate and increased levels of cortisol.
T-cells become activated and multiply rapidly, mounting vari- ous forms of counterattack (see Figure 5.2). T-cells circulate through the blood and lymph systems in an inactive form. Each T-cell has receptors on its surface that recog- nize one specific type of antigen. However, the T-cells are unable to recognize antigens by themselves. They become activated when immune cells called   macrophages   (the word means “big eater”) detect antigens and start to engulf and digest them. To activate the T-cells, the macrophages release a chemical known as   interleukin-1 . With the help of the macrophages, the T-cells become activated and are able to begin to destroy antigens (Maier et al., 1994). B-cells are different in structure from T-cells. When a B-cell recognizes an antigen, it begins to divide and to produce anti- bodies that circulate in the blood. This process is facilitated by cytokines that are released by the T-cells. Production of anti- bodies takes 5 days or more (Maier et al., 1994). However, the response of the immune system will be much more rapid if the antigen ever appears in the future because the immune system has a “memory” of the invader. The protective activity of the B- and T-cells is supported and reinforced by other specialized components of the system, most notably natural killer cells, macrophages (which we have already mentioned), and granulocytes. The immune system’s response to antigen invasion is intricately orchestrated, requiring the intact functioning of numerous components. An important component of the immune system response involves   cytokines . Cytokines are small protein molecules that serve as chemical messengers and allow immune cells to com- municate with each other. Interleukin-1, which we have just discussed, is a cytokine. Another cytokine that you may have heard about is interferon, which is given to patients with cancer, multiple sclerosis, and hepatitis C. Cytokines play an important role in mediating the inflam- matory and immune response (see Kronfol & Remick, 2000, for a review). They can be divided into two main categories: proinflammatory cytokines and anti-inflammatory cytokines. Proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6, or tumor necrosis factor help us deal with challenges to our immune system by augmenting the immune response. In con- trast, anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-4, IL-10, and IL-13 decrease or dampen the response that the immune system makes. Sometimes they accomplish this by blocking the synthesis of other cytokines. What makes cytokines especially interesting is that in addi- tion to communicating with the immune system, they also send signals to the brain. Because the brain and the immune system can communicate via the cytokines, we can regard the immune system almost as another sensory organ. Far from being a self- contained system, the immune system can monitor our internal state and send the brain information about infection and injury. The brain can then respond. What this means is that the brain  Helper T-cell B-cell B-cell Virgin B-cell binds Bacteria enter through punctured skin Antigen Antigen Macrophage envelops the antigen Macrophage displays the antigen portion of the bacteria B memory cell Some B-cell progeny differentiate into memory cells that prepare an early defense in case the antigen returns B-cells produce antibodies  figure   5.2  immune System responses to a Bacterial infection.  Source:   J. W. Kalat. 2001.   Biological Psychology , 7th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
is capable of influencing immune processes. With this in mind, some of the findings discussed in this chapter (the link between depression and heart disease, for example, and the health benefits of optimism and social support) make much more sense. In a very tangible way, what is going on at the level of the brain can affect what is going on with the body, and vice versa. We also know that IL-1 and other cytokines can stimulate the HPA axis (refer back to Figure 5.1). The resulting increase in cortisol sets off a negative feedback loop that is designed to prevent an excessive or exaggerated immune or inflammatory response. However, if this feedback system fails and is either too sensitive or not sensitive enough, serious disorders such as cancer, infection, or autoimmune diseases can develop. Because the brain is also involved in this feedback loop, emotional fac- tors and psychosocial stresses may tilt the balance in the feedback loop in either a helpful or a detrimental way. One implication of developments in cytokine research is that disorders of the brain could potentially have “downstream” effects on the immune system. In the opposite direction, prob- lems with the immune system may also lead to some behavioral changes or even to psychiatric problems. For example, when you are ill you sleep more, have a diminished appetite, and have little sexual interest. This is classic sickness behavior. It may also result, at least in part, from the effects of specific cytokines on the brain. When cytokines such as IL-1 or interferon are injected, subjects become lethargic, lose their appetites, and have trouble concentrating, among other problems (Reichenberg et al., 2001). In other words, they have some of the symptoms of depression. And when cancer patients are treated with cytokines such as interferon, they experience both flu-like symptoms and depression, the latter of which is typically treated with paroxetine (Paxil), an antidepressant (Musselman et al., 2001). In short, cytokines may have great potential for helping us understand the links between physical and mental well-being that are at the heart of behavioral medicine.  Stress, Depression, and the Immune System  Did you know that stress slows the healing of wounds by as much as 24 to 40 percent (Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 2002)? This is because stress is linked to suppression of the immune system (Segerstrom & Miller, 2004). The list of stressors that have been linked to immunosuppression is varied and includes sleep deprivation, marathon running, space flight, being the caregiver for a patient with dementia, and death of a spouse (Cacioppo et al., 1998; Schleifer et al., 1985; Schleifer et al., 1989; Vasiljeva et al., 1989). On the positive side, there is evidence that laughter is associated with enhanced immune functioning (Berk et al., 1988; Lefcourt, 2002). Although short-term stress (such as occurs when we take an examination) compromises the immune system (Glaser et al., 1985; Glaser et al., 1987), it is the more enduring stressors such as unemployment or loss of a spouse that are associated with the most global immunosuppression. This is of particular concern in today’s difficult economic times. People who are unemployed have lower levels of immune functioning than people who are employed. The good news, however, is that immune functioning returns to normal again once people find another job (Cohen et al., 2007). Depression is also associated with compromised immune function (Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 2002). Moreover, the relationship between depression and suppression of the immune system is at least partially independent of specific situations or events that may have provoked depressed feelings. In other words, the state of being depressed adds something beyond any negative effects of the stressors precipitating the depressed mood. Although there is a great deal of evidence linking stress to suppression of the immune system, researchers are becom- ing aware that both chronic stress and depression may also  enhance   certain immune system responses, although not in a good way (Robles et al., 2005). Chronic stress and depression may trigger the production of proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-6 (IL-6). One   correlational research   study showed that women who were caring for a family member with Alzheimer’s disease had higher levels of IL-6 than women who were either anticipating the stress of relocation or who were experiencing neither of these stressors (Lutgendorf et al., 1999). This difference was found even though the women who were caregivers were 6 to 9 years younger than the women in the other two groups and even though IL-6 levels are known to increase with age. Major depression has also been linked to enhanced production of proinflammatory cytokines, including  Stress causes our immune system to function less efficiently.  research Close-Up  Correlational Research  In contrast to experimental research (which involves manipu- lating variables in some way and seeing what happens), in correlational research the researcher observes or assesses the characteristics of different groups, learning much about them without manipulating the conditions to which they are exposed.
IL-6, but treatment with antidepressant medications can reduce this elevation (Kenis & Maes, 2002). These findings are especially interesting in light of research showing a relationship between IL-6 and aging, as well as to chronic diseases including certain cancers and cardiovascular disease (Papa- nicolaou et al., 1998). Further evidence that higher levels of IL-6 are bad for health is suggested by their association with being overweight, smoking, and having a sedentary lifestyle (Ferrucci et al., 1999). One group of investigators has reported that older adults (aver- age age 71 years) who regularly attended church had lower levels of IL-6 and were less likely to die during the course of a 12-year follow-up than those who did not go to church regularly (Lutgen- dorf et al., 2004). These findings also held when other potential confounding variables such as age, social support, being overweight, having medical problems, and being depressed were also consid- ered. Given all of the findings, it is not hard to see why researchers are becoming excited about the possibility that proinflammatory cytokines like IL-6 could be key mediators in the link between psychosocial factors and disease. Overall, what the research find- ings suggest is that chronic stress and depression can result in the immune system going out of balance in ways that may compromise health (see Robles et al., 2005). In short, the potential for psycho- logical factors to influence our health and for our health to affect our psychological well-being is becoming ever more apparent.  in review  •   Describe the biological changes that occur when we are under stress.  •   What is cortisol? Is cortisol beneficial or harmful?  •   What is meant by the term allostatic load?  •   Describe the relationship between stress and the immune system.  STRESS AnD PHySICAl HEAlTH  This chapter concerns the role of stress in physical and mental disorders. In this section we concern ourselves with medical con- ditions that are linked to stress. Because the brain influences the immune system, psychological factors are of great importance to our health and well-being. How you view problems and cope with challenges, and even your temperament, may directly affect your underlying physical health. Negative emotions such as depression, anxiety, and anger may be especially important to avoid because they are associ- ated with poor health (Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 2002). On the other hand, an optimistic outlook on life, as well as an absence of neg- ative emotions, may have some beneficial health consequences (see Rasmussen et al., 2009). Indeed, there is now a growing interest in   positive psychology   (Snyder & Lopez, 2002). This school of psychology focuses on human traits and resources such as humor, gratitude, and compassion that might have direct implications for our physical and mental well-being. An illustration of this comes from a study by Witvliet and col- leagues (2001). These researchers asked college students to select a real-life interpersonal offense (such rejection, betrayals of trust, and personal insults) that they had experienced in the past. The researchers then collected self-reports as well as heart rate, blood pressure, and facial muscle tension data from the students while they were imagining responding to the real-life transgression in a way that was either forgiving or unforgiving. In the forgiving con- dition, the students were asked to think about granting forgive- ness or developing feelings of empathy for the perpetrator. In the unforgiving condition, they were asked to stay in the victim role, to go over the hurt in their minds, and to nurse a grudge. The findings showed that when they were asked to be forgiving, participants did indeed report more feelings of empathy and forgiveness. And, when asked to ruminate and be unforgiv- ing, participants reported that they felt more negative, angry, sad, aroused, and out of control. They also showed greater tension in their brows. Importantly, their heart rates went up, their blood pressures increased, and their skin conductance (a measure of SNS arousal) revealed more arousal. Even more striking was the find- ing that even after the grudge-harboring imagery was over and the subjects were told to relax, they were unable to do so. In other words, the high state of physiological arousal that had been trig- gered by dwelling on the past hurt could not easily be turned off. What are the implications of these findings? Although fleet- ing feelings of anger probably do us no real harm, people who have a tendency to brood about the wrongs that other people have done to them may be doing themselves a major disservice. To the extent that perpetuating feelings of anger and increasing  Forgiving those who have wronged us may lower our stress levels and enhance overall well-being.
cardiovascular reactivity have consequences for heart disease and immune system functioning, harboring grudges may be hazard- ous to our health. Although it is not always easy, forgiving those who have offended us may lower our stress levels and enhance our well-being.  in review  •   What individual characteristics are associated with better or worse health?  •   What is positive psychology?  •   What are the physiological consequences of being unforgiving?  Cardiovascular Disease  Because cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death in the United States (American Heart Association, 2001), and because the impact of stress on the heart has been well researched, we use this disease to illustrate the many links between psychological factors and physical disease. Some of these are illustrated in the following case study. As you read the case of Dr. M., consider the role that negative emotions play. Also consider Dr. M’s personal- ity. Do you consider him an optimist or a pessimist?  The Angry Physician   Dr. M was a 44-year-old physi- cian. The middle son of parents who had emigrated from Italy, he was ambitious and determined to make a successful life for himself and his family. He worked long hours helping patients with cancer, and he was caring and compassionate. His patients loved him. But his job was also very stressful. Added to the many demands of maintaining a busy medical practice was the great sadness that he felt when (inevitably) many of his terminally ill patients died. At home Dr. M was a loyal husband and devoted father to his three children. But he was not an easy person to live with. He found it hard to relax, and he had a very volatile disposition. He was frequently angry and would shout at everyone when- ever he had had a bad day. Often his moods were caused by his feeling that he was not fully appreciated by the other doctors with whom he worked. Although his wife realized that he “just needed to vent,” his moods took a toll on the family. His children distanced themselves from him much of the time, and his wife became less and less happy in the marriage. One day at work, Dr. M started to feel unwell. He began to sweat and experienced a heavy pressure in his chest. It was difficult for him to breathe. Dr. M recognized the severity of his symptoms and called out for medical help. He had a sudden and severe heart attack and survived only because he was work- ing in a hospital at the time of the attack. If he had not received prompt medical attention, he almost certainly would have died. After his heart attack Dr. M became very depressed. It was almost as though he could not accept that he, a physician, had a severe medical problem. Although he lived in fear of having another heart attack, his efforts to lose weight (which his doctor had told him to do) were sabotaged by his unwillingness to follow any diet. He would try and then give up, coming back from the Italian bakery with bags of pastries. Making the problem worse was the fact that because he was a doctor, his own doctors were somewhat reticent about telling him what he had to do to manage his illness. He went back to work, and his family walked on eggshells, afraid to do or say anything that might stress him. His wife tried to encourage him to follow the doctors’ recom- mendations. However, Dr. M’s attitude was that if he was going to die anyway, he might as well enjoy himself until he did.  hypertension  When we are stressed the blood vessels supplying our internal organs constrict (become more narrow) and blood flows in greater quantity to the muscles of the trunk and limbs. When this happens the heart must work harder. As it beats faster and with greater force, our pulse quickens and blood pressure increases. When the period of stress is over, blood pressure returns to normal. If the emotional strain is more enduring, however, high blood pressure may become a chronic problem. Ideally, blood pressure should be below 120/80. (By conven- tion, the first number given is the systolic pressure when the heart contracts; the second is the diastolic or between-beat pressure; see Figure 5.3 on p. 139.) The unit of measurement is millimeters of mercury (Hg). The definition of   hypertension   is having a persisting systolic blood pressure of 140 or more and a diastolic blood pressure of 90 or higher. Blood pressure is simple and pain- less to measure by means of the familiar inflated arm cuff. In general, blood pressure increases as we age. In younger adults, more men than women suffer from high blood pressure. After about age 50, however, the prevalence of hypertension is greater in women (Burt et al., 1995), probably because meno- pause amplifies the stiffness in the arteries that naturally occurs with increasing age (Takahashi et al., 2005). Current estimates suggest that sustained hypertension afflicts around 28 percent of Americans (Friedewald et al., 2010). A small percentage of cases of hypertension are caused by distinct medical problems. However, in the majority of cases there is no specific physical cause. This is referred to as   essen- tial hypertension . Hypertension is an insidious and dangerous disorder. The person who has it may have no symptoms until its consequences show up as medical complications. Hypertension increases the risk of coronary heart disease and stroke. It is also often a causal factor in occlusive (blocking) disease of the periph- eral arteries, congestive heart failure (due to the heart’s inability to overcome the resistance of constricted arteries), kidney failure, blindness, and a number of other serious physical ailments. Many clinicians and investigators think that hypertension begins when a person has a biological tendency toward high cardiovascular reactivity to stress (e.g., Tuomisto, 1997; Turner, 1994). This might be considered to represent a diathesis, or vul- nerability factor. Over time, and in the face of chronic and diffi- cult life circumstances, which create stress, the vulnerable person
will go from having borderline hypertension to having a serious clinical problem. Not being able to express anger in a construc- tive way (e.g., by expressing why one feels angry and trying to reach an understanding by engaging in open communication with the person one is angry with) may also increase a person’s risk for hypertension (Davidson et al., 2000).  hyPerTenSion AnD AFriCAn AMeriCAnS   African Americans have much higher rates of hypertension than European Americans (40% versus 27%; see Fox et al., 2011). Their death rate from hypertension is also three times higher. Interestingly, the higher prevalence of hypertension in African Americans is not just found in the United States but seems to be the case for blacks worldwide. Rates of hypertension in young people are also alarmingly high. Ten percent of African American men aged 18 to 21 have hypertension compared with prevalence rates of 1 to 2 percent in other groups (see Friedewald et al., 2010). Higher levels of stress from such factors as inner-city living, economic disadvantage, exposure to violence, and race-based dis- crimination may play a key role in this (Din-Dzietham et al., 2004; Wilson et al., 2004). Lifestyle may also be a factor. African American women in particular are more likely to be overweight than Caucasian women (see Whitfield et al., 2002). African Americans are also less likely to exercise than Caucasians are (Bassett et al., 2002; Whitfield et al., 2002), perhaps because many live in places where health clubs are scarce and it is not safe to walk outside. Biological factors likely also play a role. Like most Americans, African Americans consume a lot of fast food, which is loaded with salt. There is evidence that, as a group, African Americans are more likely to retain sodium, which results in fluid retention and endocrine changes that in turn elevate blood pressure (Anderson & McNeilly, 1993). Renin, an enzyme produced by the kidneys that is linked to blood pressure, is also processed differently by African Americans. Finally, studies suggest that nitric oxide (a dis- solved gas that is crucial for the proper functioning of blood vessels and blood cells) is produced in lower levels in the blood vessels of African Americans and may also be destroyed more quickly too. All of these biological differences, as well as the presence of some specific genes (see Fox et al., 2011), may increase the risk that African Americans have of developing hypertension.  Coronary heart Disease  The heart is a pump, made of muscle. Coronary heart disease (CHD) is a potentially lethal blockage of the arteries that supply blood to the heart muscle, or myocardium. If the muscles of the heart are not getting enough oxygenated blood, the person may experience severe chest pain (angina pectoris). This is a signal that the delivery of oxygenated blood to the affected area of the heart is insufficient for its current workload. An even more severe problem is myocardial infarction. This results from a blockage in a section of the coronary arterial system. Because the heart muscle is being deprived of oxygen, tissue may die, permanently damaging the heart. If the myocardial infarction is extensive  figure   5.3  Defining hypertension.   Blood pressure levels once thought normal are now considered high enough to signal prehypertension.  Systolic Pressure is measured when the blood vessel wall contracts. Normal   Blood Vessel Prehypertension Stage one hypertension Stage two hypertension Systolic   below 120 Systolic   120–139 Systolic   140–159 Systolic   160+ Diastolic 80–89 Diastolic 90–99 Diastolic 100+ Diastolic   below 80  Diastolic Pressure is measured when the wall relaxes between beats.
enough the person may not survive. Many instances of sudden cardiac death, in which victims have no prior history of CHD symptoms, are attributed to silent CHD. This often occurs when a piece of the atherosclerotic material adhering to the arterial walls (a “plaque”) breaks loose and lodges in a smaller vessel, blocking it. Every year, more than 900,000 people in the United States experience a myocardial infarction (Schwartz et al., 2010).  risk and Causal Factors in Cardiovascular Disease ChroniC AnD ACUTe STreSS   Stress increases the risk of having a heart attack. Several researchers have documented that deaths from CHD rise in the days and weeks following a severe earthquake (see Leor et al., 1996). As Figure 5.4 shows, after the Northridge earthquake in Los Angeles in 1994, the number of sudden deaths due to CHD rose from an average of 4.6 (in the days preceding the earthquake) to 24 on the day of the earth- quake (Kloner et al., 1997). There was also an increase in sudden death from cardiac events after the Hanshin-Awaji earthquake in Japan (Kario & Ohashi, 1997). Everyday forms of stress can also elevate risk for CHD and death (Matthews & Gump, 2002; Smith & Ruiz, 2002). A good example is work-related stress. Here the key factors appear to be having a highly demanding job and having little control over decision making. Both of these types of job stress increase risk for future CHD. Moreover, this association still holds when other negative health behaviors (such as smoking) are controlled (see Peter & Siegrist, 2000). It is also interesting to note that, in people who work, most heart attacks occur on a Monday. The stress of returning to work after the weekend is thought to play a role in this (Kloner et al., 2006). Finally, simply being asked to give a 5-minute speech about an assigned topic to a small (but evaluative) audience was enough to produce detectable changes in cardiac function in about 20 percent of patients with existing coronary artery disease (see Sheps et al., 2002). Furthermore, those patients who were most reactive to this form of mental stress were almost three times more likely (compared to the less reactive patients) to die in the next 5 to 6 years. Mental stress is known to raise systolic blood pressure and also to cause an elevation in epinephrine. Mental stress may also reduce the oxygen supply to the heart muscle (Yeung et al., 1991). What the results of the Sheps study illustrate, however, is that stress does not have to be extreme or severe to be associated with lethal consequences later.  PerSonALiTy   Attempts to explore the psychological contribu- tion to the development of CHD date back to the identifica- tion of the   Type A behavior pattern   (Friedman & Rosenman, 1959). Type A behavior is characterized by excessive competitive drive, extreme commitment to work, impatience or time urgency, and hostility. Many of us know people who are like this, and the term   Type A   is now quite commonly used in everyday language. Interest in Type A behavior escalated after the results of the Western Collaborative Group Study began to be published. This investigation involved some 3,150 healthy men between the ages of 35 and 59 who, on entry, were typed as A or B status. (Type B personalities do not have Type A traits and tend to be more relaxed, more laid-back, and less time-pressured people.) All the men were then carefully followed for eight and a half years. Compared to Type B personality, Type A personality was associ- ated with a twofold increase in coronary artery disease and an eightfold increased risk of recurrent myocardial infarction over the course of the follow-up (Rosenman et al., 1975). The second major study of Type A behavior and CHD was the Framingham Heart Study. This began in 1948 and involved the long-term follow-up of a large sample of men and women from Framingham, Massachusetts (see Kannel et al., 1987). Approximately 1,700 CHD-free subjects were typed as A or B in the mid-1960s. Analysis of the data for CHD occurrence dur- ing an 8-year follow-up period not only confirmed the major findings of the earlier Western Collaborative Group Study but extended them to women as well. Not all studies reported positive associations between Type A behavior and risk of coronary artery disease, however (Case et al., 1985; Shekelle et al., 1985). Moreover, as research  research Close-Up  Risk Factor  A risk factor is a variable that increases the likelihood of a specific (and usually negative) outcome occurring at a later time. For example, obesity is a risk factor for heart disease; perfectionism is a risk factor for eating disorders.  11   14   17   20   23  Number of deaths January   1994  30 20 10 0  figure   5.4  Cardiac Deaths and earthquakes .   On the day of the Northridge earthquake in California (January 17, 1994), cardiac deaths showed a sharp increase.  Source: Leor et al., 1996.   The New England Journal of Medicine,   334(7), February 15, 1996, p. 415.
with the construct has continued, it has become clear that it is the hostility component of the Type A construct (including anger, contempt, scorn, cynicism, and mistrust) that is most closely cor- related with coronary artery deterioration (see Rozanski et al., 1999, for a summary of studies). A more recent development is the identification of the “distressed” or   Type D personality   type (Denollet et al., 2000). People with Type D personality have a tendency to experience negative emotions and also to feel insecure and anxious. Men with CHD who scored high on measures of chronic emotional distress were more likely to have fatal and nonfatal heart attacks over the 5-year follow-up period than were men who did not have these Type D personality traits (Denollet et al., 2000). Peo- ple with higher scores on the negative affectivity component of Type D personality (see Figure 5.5) are also at increased risk of having more problems after cardiac surgery (Tully et al., 2011). Overall, the Type D personality construct also provides a way to tie in some of the other findings linking negative emotions and CHD, which we discuss more below.  DePreSSion   People with heart disease are approximately three times more likely than healthy people to be depressed (Chesney, 1996; Shapiro, 1996). This may not strike you as especially sur- prising. If you had heart disease, perhaps you would be depressed too. However, depression is much more commonly found in people who have heart disease than it is in people who have other serious medical problems, like cancer (Miller & Blackwell, 2006). Furthermore, heart attack patients with high levels of depressive symptoms after having a heart attack are three times more likely to die over the next 5 years than patients who do not show high levels of depression (Glassman, 2007; Lesperance et al., 2002). The most recent research in this area suggests that anhedonia (which is a symptom of depression characterized by profound loss of interest or pleasure) may be especially pre- dictive of increased mortality after a heart attack (Davidson et al., 2010). Depression also appears to be a risk factor for the   develop- ment   of CHD. Pratt and her colleagues (1996), for 14 years, followed over 1,500 men and women with no prior history of heart disease. They found that 8 percent of those who had expe- rienced major depression at some point and 6 percent of those who had experienced mild depression at some point had a heart attack during the 14-year follow-up interval. By contrast, only 3 percent of those without a history of depression suffered heart attacks. When medical history and other variables were taken into account, those who had experienced major depression were found to be four times more likely to have had a heart attack. Similar findings have also been reported in other studies (Ferketich et al., 2000; Ford et al., 1998). Why are depression and heart disease so closely linked? Cur- rent thinking is that this is another example of the mind–body connection. Stress is thought to activate the immune system, triggering the production of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor by the white blood cells. Long-term exposure to these proinflammatory cytokines is thought to lead to changes in the brain that manifest them- selves as symptoms of depression. Proinflammatory cytokines also trigger the growth of plaques in the blood vessels as well as making it more likely that those plaques will rupture and cause a heart attack. In other words, as illustrated in Figure 5.6, the link between heart disease and depression is due to inflammation and the presence of inflammatory cytokines (see Miller & Blackwell, 2006; Robles et al., 2005). This is why doctors now test for the presence of C-reactive protein (CRP)—a molecule produced by the liver in response to IL-6—when they want to assess a per- son’s risk for heart disease. New research is also linking discrimi- nation to elevated levels of CRP in African Americans (see The World Around Us box on p. 142).  TEST: ARE YOU A TYPE D?  The social and emotional problems associated with Type D personality can increase your chances of developing heart disease. Read each statement and circle the appropriate number to indicate your answer. There are no right or wrong answers: your own impression is the only thing that matters. 1. I make contact easily when I meet people 2. I often make a fuss about unimportant things 3. I often talk to strangers 4. I often feel unhappy 5. I am often irritated 6. I often feel inhibited in social interactions 7. I take a gloomy view of things 8. I find it hard to start a conversation 9. I am often in a bad mood 10. I am a closed kind of person 11. I would rather keep people at a distance 12. I often find myself worrying about something 13. I am often down in the dumps 14. When socializing, I don't find the right things to talk about 4   3   2   1   0 0   1   2   3   4 4   3   2   1   0 0   1   2   3   4 0   1   2   3   4 0   1   2   3   4 0   1   2   3   4 0   1   2   3   4 0   1   2   3   4 0   1   2   3   4 0   1   2   3   4 0   1   2   3   4 0   1   2   3   4 0   1   2   3   4 False Less false Neutral Less true True  TAKE THE TEST Circle your answers: 1 2   ADD YOUR ANSWERS Negative Affectivity:  Add scores for questions 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 12 and 13  Social Inhibition:  Add scores for questions 1, 3, 6, 8, 10, 11, and 14  3   SCORE THE RESULTS  You qualify as a Type D personality if your Negative Affectivity is 10 or higher and your Social Inhibition is 10 or higher.  figure   5.5  Characteristics of the Type D Personality.  Source: Based on Johan Denollet. 1998 Personality and coronary heart disease: The type-D Scale-16 (DS16).   Annals of Behavioral Medicine,   20 (3) 209–215, and N. Kupper and J. Denollet (2007).   Type D Personality as a prognostic factor in heart disease: Assess- ment and mediating mechanisms. Journal of Personality Assessment , 89 (3) 265–276.
Chronic Stressors  Excessive Inflammation  Depressive Symptoms Cardiac Disease  figure   5.6  Model of how inflammatory processes mediate the relations among chronic stressors, depressive symptoms, and cardiac disease. Stressors activate the immune system in a way that leads to persistent inflammation. With long-term exposure to the molecular products of inflammation, people are expected to develop symptoms of depression and experience progression of cardiac disease.  Source: Miller & Blackwell. 2006, Dec. Turning Up the Heat: Inflammation as a Mechanism Linking Chronic Stress, Depression and Heart Disease.  Current Directions in Psychological Science,   15, (6): 269–272(4). Copyright © 2006. Reproduced with permission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  AnxieTy   Depression is not the only form of negative affect that is linked to CHD. Research has also demonstrated a relationship between phobic anxiety and increased risk for sudden cardiac death. In a classic early study, Kawachi, Colditz, and colleagues (1994) studied nearly 34,000 male professionals who had been assessed for panic disorder, agoraphobia, and generalized anxiety. Over the course of the 2-year follow-up study, sudden cardiac death was six times higher in the men with the highest levels of anxiety. The findings were replicated in a second study of nearly 2,300 men who were participating in a normative aging study (Kawachi, Sparrow, et al., 1994, 1995). Prospective studies of women (who were free of cardiac disease at the start of the study) have also linked phobic anxiety with a higher risk of sudden car- diac death (Albert et al., 2005).  SoCiAL iSoLATion AnD LACk oF SoCiAL SUPPorT   Stud- ies point to the strong link between social factors and the devel- opment of CHD. Monkeys housed alone have four times more atherosclerosis (fatty deposits in blood vessels that eventually create a blockage) than monkeys housed in social groups (Shively  the World around us  Racial Discrimination and Cardiovascular Health in African Americans  E xperiences of discrimination have been linked to a number of bad health outcomes, including increased blood pressure and signs of cardiovascular disease. But how might this association arise? New research suggests that an important mediator in this relationship could be C-reactive protein, or CRP. CRP is a protein synthesized in the liver. High levels of CRP signal widespread inflammation in the body. In an interesting study, Lewis and colleagues (2010) measured levels of CRP in blood samples taken from 296 older African Americans, whose average age was 73. These research participants also completed a questionnaire that asked about their experiences of everyday discrimination. Items on the questionnaire included being treated with disrespect, getting poorer service in restaurants or stores, as well as experiences of being insulted or harassed. The findings revealed a significant correlation between everyday discrimination and CRP, where more experiences of discrimination were associated with higher levels of CRP. The association also remained even after factors such as smoking, high blood pressure, depression, and other health problems were considered. Although much more remains to be learned, these preliminary findings are very exciting. They provide a clue about a potential pathway through which experiences of racial bias might ultimately play a role in the poor cardiovascular health of older African Americans.
et al., 1989). Similarly, people who have a relatively small social network or who consider themselves to have little emotional support are more likely to develop CHD over time (see Rozanski et al., 1999, for a review). For people who already have CHD, there is a similar association. In one study of people who had already suffered a heart attack, those who reported that they had low levels of emotional support were almost three times more likely to experi- ence another cardiac event (Berkman et al., 1992). In another study, death in CHD patients was three times more likely over the next 5 years if they were unmarried or had no one that they could confide in (Williams et al., 1992). Echoing these findings, Coyne and colleagues (2001) have shown that the quality of the marital relationship predicts 4-year survival rates in patients with congestive heart failure. Although uncertain at this time, it may be that the stress that comes from marital tension or from a lack of social support triggers an inflammatory response in the immune system, causing depression and heart problems as a result. It may also be that depression, which is linked to rela- tionship problems, could trigger an inflammatory response in its own right.  The iMPorTAnCe oF eMoTion regULATion   If hostility, depression, and anxiety are all predictive of developing coronary heart disease, is it beneficial to be able to regulate one’s emo- tions? New research suggests that it is. In one study of men and women without a history of heart disease, it was found that it was the people who were   least   able to control their anger who developed more heart problems over the next 10 to 15 years (Haukkala et al., 2010). In another study of 1,122 men who were followed for an average of 13 years, it was again those with the best emotion regulation skills who were the least likely to develop cardiac disease (Kubzansky et al., 2011). Taken together these findings suggest that self-regulation skills may be very important—not only for our psychological well being but for our physical health as well.  in review  •   What is essential hypertension, and what are some of the factors that contribute to its development?  •   What risk factors are associated with coronary heart disease?  •   What is Type A personality?  •   What is Type D personality?  •   How might racial bias play a role in the development of cardio- vascular disease?  Treatment of Stress-Related Physical Disorders  As you have learned, environmental stressors are often closely linked to the development of a physical illness. Unfortu- nately, once an illness has developed and physical changes have taken place, removal of the stressor may not be enough to bring about recovery and restore health. This emphasizes the value of prevention and highlights the importance of stress management.  Biological interventions  People who have serious physical diseases obviously require medical treatment for their problems. For patients with CHD, such treatments might include surgical procedures as well as medications to lower cholesterol or reduce the risk of blood clots. However, in light of the strong associations between depression and risk for CHD, treating depression is also of the utmost importance. Unfortunately, most people with clinical depression go untreated, resulting in an unnecessary added risk for CHD. Moreover, even though there is no medical risk factor that is more important in predicting mortality for patients who have already had a heart attack (Welin et al., 2000), physicians often fail to treat depression in their cardiac patients. Instead, they dismiss it as an understandable conse- quence of having had a life-threatening medical scare (Glass- man, 2005). Of those with major depression at the time of a heart attack, approximately one-half of those who have gone without treatment remain depressed or else have relapsed again 1 year later (Hance et al., 1996). However, research shows that thousands of lives can be saved each year by giving antidepres- sant medications to patients who have suffered a myocardial infarction and who are depressed. In one study, patients treated with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) were much less likely to die or have another heart attack than patients who were not taking antidepressant medications (Taylor et al., 2005). It is also worth noting that, in this study, treatment with cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT; see Chap- ter 16 for more about this approach) was not associated with reduced mortality in the patients, although CBT treatment did help alleviate depression (see Berkman et al., 2003; Glass- man, 2005).  Psychological interventions  How can we help ourselves stay healthy in the face of stress? As we have already mentioned, developing effective emotion regula- tion skills is probably beneficial. Evidence suggests that the fol- lowing approaches are also helpful.  eMoTionAL DiSCLoSUre   “Opening up” and writing expressively about life problems in a systematic way does seem to be an effective therapy for many people with illnesses (Pennebaker, 1997). In the first study of emotional disclosure in people with rheumatoid arthritis, Kelley, Lumley, and Leisen (1997) found that people who had written about their emotions had significantly less physical dysfunction than those assigned to a control condition. In another study, people with either rheumatoid arthritis or asthma were asked to write about either
their most traumatically stressful life experience or (in the case of the control group) their plans for the day. Subjects wrote for 20 minutes for 3 consecutive days. When they were assessed 4 months later, the participants with rheumatoid arthritis who were assigned to the emotional disclosure condition were do- ing significantly better than the participants with rheumatoid arthritis assigned to the control group. In studies that involve emotional disclosure, patients often experience initial increases in emotional distress during the writ- ing phase but then show improvement in their medical status over follow-up. Why emotional disclosure provides clinical benefits for patients is still not clear, however. One reason could be that patients are given an opportunity for emotional cathar- sis, or “blowing off steam.” Another possibility is that writing gives people an opportunity to rethink their problems. Given what we know about the link between emotional and physical well-being, it is not unreasonable to speculate that both emo- tional catharsis and rethinking problems could help improve immune function or perhaps decrease levels of circulating stress hormones.  BioFeeDBACk   Biofeedback procedures aim to make patients more aware of such things as their heart rate, level of muscle ten- sion, or blood pressure. This is done by connecting the patient to monitoring equipment and then providing a cue (for example, an audible tone) to the patient when he or she is successful at making a desired response (e.g., lowering blood pressure or de- creasing tension in a facial muscle). Over time, patients become more consciously aware of their internal responses and able to modify them when necessary. Biofeedback seems to be helpful in treating some condi- tions, such as headaches (Nestoriuc et al., 2008). After an average of 11 sessions, patients report improvement in their symptoms and a decrease in the frequency of their headaches. Moreover, these treatment effects tend to be stable over time. Although it is especially helpful for children and adolescents, adults who have experienced headaches for a long time are also helped by biofeedback.  reLAxATion AnD MeDiTATion   Researchers have examined the effects of various behavioral relaxation techniques on selected stress-related illnesses. The results have been variable, though generally encouraging. For example, there is evidence that relax- ation techniques can help patients with essential hypertension (see Blumenthal et al., 2002). Relaxation training can also help patients who suffer from tension headaches (Holroyd, 2002). However, in general, headache sufferers treated with biofeedback appear to do better than those treated only with relaxation, and the best clinical results occur when these two treatments are combined (Nestoriuc et al., 2008). A growing topic of interest is meditation. Schneider and colleagues (2005) have shown that the daily practice of Transcendental Meditation may be helpful in reducing blood pressure. In this study, 194 African American patients with chronic hypertension were randomly assigned to receive training in either Transcendental Meditation or progressive muscle relax- ation (which involves tensing and relaxing various muscle groups in a systematic way) or else to receive general information about lifestyle changes that would be helpful to them. Patients who practiced Transcendental Meditation for 20 minutes twice a day reduced their diastolic blood pressure significantly more than did patients who practiced muscle relaxation or who received sound health care advice.  CogniTive-BehAvior TherAPy   CBT has been shown to be an effective intervention for headache (Martin, Forsyth et al., 2007) as well as for other types of pain. CBT-oriented family therapy was markedly more successful than routine pediatric care in alleviating children’s complaints of recurrent abdominal pain (Robins et al., 2005). Some CBT techniques have also been used for patients suffering from rheumatoid arthritis. Compared to those receiving standard medical care, patients who received CBT showed better physical, social, and psychological function- ing (Evers et al., 2002). Finally, we note that making a conscious effort to slow down and enjoy life seems to be a prescription for better health. Meyer Friedman, who was the codiscoverer of the link between Type A behavior and heart disease, had a heart attack at age 55. A self-described Type-A personality, he made a conscious choice to change his ways in accordance with his own discoveries. To get more in touch with his slow, patient, and creative side, he read Proust’s languid seven-volume opus   Remembrance of Things Past   three times. In short, he trained himself to relax and to enjoy life. He had the last laugh at stress by living to the ripe old age of 90 (Wargo, 2007).  Making an effort to slow down and relax may provide many health benefits.
in review  •   Why is it so important to screen people with heart disease for depression?  •   What clinical approaches have been used to help people?  STRESS AnD MEnTAl HEAlTH  Our focus thus far has been to describe the nature of stress, highlighting the role it plays in physical disorders. But, as we have noted repeatedly throughout this chapter, when we experi- ence stress, we pay a price not only in our bodies but also in our minds. In the sections below, we discuss the psychological con- sequences of experiencing the kind of stress that overwhelms our abilities to adjust and to cope. More specifically, we focus on two  DSM   disorders,   adjustment disorder   and PTSD. Both of these are triggered by exposure to stress. There is an important differ- ence between them, however. In adjustment disorder, the stressor is something that is commonly experienced, and the nature of the psychological reaction is much less severe. In the case of PTSD, there is exposure to a traumatic stressor that is accompa- nied by fear, helplessness, or horror. Not surprisingly, the stress disorder that results from this can be intense and debilitating.  Adjustment Disorder  An adjustment disorder is a psychological response to a common stressor (e.g., divorce, death of a loved one, loss of a job) that results in clinically significant behavioral or emotional symptoms. The stressor can be a single event, such as going away to college, or involve multiple stressors, such as a business failure and marital problems. People undergoing severe stress that exceeds their cop- ing resources may warrant the diagnosis of adjustment disorder (Strain & Newcorn, 2007). For the diagnosis to be given, symp- toms must begin within 3 months of the onset of the stressor. In addition, the person must experience more distress than would be expected given the circumstances or be unable to function as usual. In adjustment disorder, the person’s symptoms lessen or dis- appear when the stressor ends or when the person learns to adapt to the stressor. In cases where the symptoms continue beyond 6 months, the diagnosis is usually changed to some other mental disorder. Adjustment disorder is probably the least stigmatizing and mildest diagnosis a therapist can assign to a client. Next we discuss two situations that frequently lead to adjustment disorder.  Adjustment Disorder Caused by Unemployment  Work-related problems can produce great stress in employees (Len- non & Limonic, 2010). But being unemployed can be even more stressful. As a result of the recent recession millions of Americans have been coping with chronic unemployment. Tony is one of them.  Maybe Today Will Be the Day   Tony wakes up at 5:30 every morning and makes coffee. He arranges his laptop, phone, and notepad on the kitchen table. And then he waits for the phone to ring. Unemployed for the last 16 months after losing his job as a transportation sales manager, Tony spends the day send- ing out resumes and cover letters. But most days nothing hap- pens. “The worst moment is at the end of the day when it’s 4:30 and you did everything you could, and the phone hasn’t rung, the emails haven’t come through,” says Tony. He asks himself what he is doing wrong. Tony misses his old routine of getting dressed in the morning and going out to work. But he tries to stay optimis- tic. “You always have to hope that that morning when you get up, it’s going to be the day.” (Based on Kwoh, 2010)  Unemployment reached a peak of 10.6 percent of the labor force in January 2010. It is now around 7.6 percent (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2013). In almost every community, one can find workers who have been laid off from jobs they had held for many years and who are facing the end of their unemployment compensation. Unemployment is an especially severe problem for young minority males, many of whom live in a permanent economic depression with few job prospects. Rates of unemploy- ment for blacks are twice as high as they are for whites (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2013). Managing the stress associated with unemployment requires great coping strength, especially for people who have previously earned an adequate living. Some people (like Tony in the case example above) find ways to stay focused and moti- vated, even though this can be very difficult at times. For oth- ers, however, unemployment can have serious long-term effects. One of the most disturbing findings is that unemployment, especially if it is prolonged, increases the risk of suicide (Borges et al, 2010; Classen & Dunn, 2011). Unemployment also takes its toll on other family members, especially children. When children live in families where a parent has lost a job, they are 15 percent more likely to have to repeat a grade at school (Stevens & Schaller, 2009).  in review  •   What is an adjustment disorder?  •   What kinds of stressors are potential triggers for the develop- ment of an adjustment disorder?  Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  In   DSM-5   post-traumatic stress disorder is now grouped with other disorders in a new diagnostic category called trauma- and stressor- related disorders. Adjustment disorder, which we have just discussed, and acute stress disorder (see next section) are also part of this new diagnostic category. This is because the experience of major stress is central to the development of all of these conditions.  Watch   the   Video   Bonnie: Posttraumatic Stress Disorder   on   MyPsychLab
note:   The following criteria apply to adults, adolescents, and chil- dren older than 6 years.  A.   Exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence in one (or more) of the following ways:  1.   Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).  2.   Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others.  3.   Learning that the traumatic event(s) occurred to a close family member or close friend. In cases of actual or threatened death of a family member or friend, the event(s) must have been violent or accidental.  4.   Experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of the traumatic event(s) (e.g., first responders collecting human remains; police officers repeatedly exposed to details of child abuse).  note:   Criterion A4 does not apply to exposure through electronic media, television, movies, or pictures, unless this exposure is work related.  B.   Presence of one (or more) of the following intrusion symptoms associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred:  1.   Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memo- ries of the traumatic event(s).  note:   In children older than 6 years, repetitive play may occur in which themes or aspects of the traumatic event(s) are expressed.  2.   Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream are related to the traumatic event(s).  note:   In children, there may be frightening dreams without recognizable content.  3.   Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the individual feels or acts as if the traumatic event(s) were recurring. (Such reactions may occur on a continuum, with the most extreme expression being a complete loss of awareness of present surroundings.)  note:   In children, trauma-specific reenactment may occur in play.  4.   Intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s).  5.   Marked physiological reactions to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the trau- matic event(s).  C.   Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by one or both of the following:  1.   Avoidance of or efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).  2.   Avoidance of or efforts to avoid external reminders (peo- ple, places, conversations, activities, objects, situations) that arouse distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).  D.   Negative alterations in cognitions and mood associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning or worsening after the trau- matic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by two (or more) of the following:  1.   Inability to remember an important aspect of the trau- matic event(s) (typically due to dissociative amnesia and not to other factors such as head injury, alcohol, or drugs).  2.   Persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expec- tations about oneself, others, or the world (e.g., “I am bad,” “No one can be trusted,” “The world is com- pletely dangerous,” “My whole nervous system is per- manently ruined”).  3.   Persistent, distorted cognitions about the cause or con- sequences of the traumatic event(s) that lead the indi- vidual to blame himself/herself or others.  4.   Persistent negative emotional state (e.g., fear, horror, anger, guilt, or shame).  5.   Markedly diminished interest or participation in signifi- cant activities.  6.   Feelings of detachment or estrangement from others.  7.   Persistent inability to experience positive emotions (e.g., inability to experience happiness, satisfaction, or loving feelings).  e.   Marked alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by two (or more) of the following:  1.   Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) typically expressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects.  2.   Reckless or self-destructive behavior.  3.   Hypervigilance.  4.   Exaggerated startle response.  5.   Problems with concentration.  6.   Sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep or restless sleep).  F.   Duration of the disturbance (Criteria B, C, D, and E) is more than 1 month.  g.   The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  h.   The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., medication, alcohol) or another medical condition.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Posttraumatic Stress Disorder   DSM-5
The diagnosis of PTSD first entered the   DSM   in 1980 (see the   DSM   table for current clinical criteria). At this time, psychiatry began to realize that many veterans were emotion- ally scarred and unable to return to normal civilian life after their military service in Vietnam. The proposal to include PTSD in the diagnostic system was initially opposed, not least because including a disorder that had a clear and explicit cause (trauma) was inconsistent with the atheoretical nature of the  DSM . Nonetheless, a consensus emerged that any extreme, terrifying, and stressful event that was life-threatening and outside the ordinary bounds of everyday experience could lead to psychological symptoms similar to those experienced by the Vietnam veterans. In other words, at the time of its entry into the   DSM   (which is after all a manual of mental disorders), PTSD was viewed as a   normal   response to an   abnormal   stressor (see McNally, 2008). In the Thinking Critically About   DSM-5   below we describe how changes to the diagnostic criteria for PTSD have changed over time. However, in keeping with the diathesis-stress model, research over the past two decades has made it clear that certain preexisting vulnerabilities also play an important role. Traumatic stressors include combat, rape, being confined in a concentra- tion camp, and experiencing a natural disaster such as a tsunami, earthquake, or tornado. Stress symptoms are very common in the immediate after- math of a traumatic event. However, for most people, these symp- toms decrease with time. Rothbaum and Foa (1993) reported that 95 percent of women who had been raped met the symptom cri- teria for PTSD within 2 weeks of the assault. One month after the rape, this figure had declined to 63.3 percent of women, and after 3 months, 45.9 percent of the women were diagnosed with the PTSD. Natural recovery with time is therefore a common pattern.  W hen PTSD was first introduced into the   DSM , the diagnostic criteria required exposure to a traumatic event that was “outside the range of usual human experience” and that would cause “significant symptoms of distress in almost anyone.” The exemplars provided included rape, earthquakes, torture, and military combat. In other words, the emphasis was on the nature of the stressor itself and not on the emotional response of the victim (Breslau & Kessler, 2001; McNally, 2008; Shalev, 2009). A major change occurred with   DSM-IV-TR.   Not only was there a broadening of the range of experiences that could now be used to diagnose PTSD, but it was also required that the person’s response involve “intense fear, helplessness or horror.” Qualifying events could now include learning about the death of a close friend or rel- ative (as long as the death was sudden and unexpected), being di- agnosed with a life-threatening illness, or learning about traumatic events experienced by others. In short, there was a change in em- phasis from the characteristics of the stressor to the experience of the victim. Rather than conceptualizing PTSD as a normal response to an   abnormal stressor,   in   DSM-IV , PTSD was viewed as a   patho- logical response   to an extreme form of stress (McNally, 2008). The implications of these changes were not trivial. Using the wider variety of stressors permitted in   DSM-IV , a survey of com- munity residents revealed that the vast majority (89.6%) reported that they had been exposed to a traumatic event that (given also the required level of emotional response and presence of other symptoms) would potentially qualify them for PTSD diagnosis (Breslau & Kessler, 2001). In most cases, the traumatic event was learning of the sudden and unexpected death of a loved one. Moreover, females who reported traumatic events were much more likely than males to also report that they had had an emo- tional reaction that was severe enough for them to qualify for the PTSD diagnosis. So not only was the definition of a traumatic event broadened, but the kind of emotional response that quali- fies for PTSD was much more likely to be reported by women than by men (Pratchett et al., 2010). In   DSM-5 , the diagnostic criteria for PTSD have been tightened. The traumatic event must now be experienced by the person di- rectly, either because the event happens to you or because you witness, in person, something traumatic happening to someone else. No longer is it possible to experience trauma indirectly through electronic media (which could occur when someone watches television footage of a terrible event). As before, there is also a provision for experiencing trauma by learning of the death of another person. However, the person must be a close friend or relative and their death must have been violent or accidental. Yet another change is the removal of the requirement that the person respond in a particular way (i.e., with fear, helplessness, or horror) because this confounds the response with the event itself (Mc- Nally, 2009) and also makes it more likely that women will receive the diagnosis. Defining trauma exposure is difficult to do. None- theless, we believe that the modifications that have been made to the   DSM   criteria are good overall. Tightening the diagnostic criteria in these ways means that PTSD is more likely to remain a distinct diagnosis reserved for people who have experienced dev- astating life events. No longer will it be possible to diagnose PTSD in people who merely watch traumatic events on their computer or television screens and are very distressed by what they see.  THINKING CrITICAllY about dsM-5  Changes to the Diagnostic Criteria for PTSD   DSM-5
Acute Stress Disorder  The diagnosis of PTSD requires that symptoms must last for at least 1 month. What this means is that, in the study just described, the women who had symptoms within 2 weeks of the assault would not be diagnosed with PTSD. Instead, the diag- nosis would be   acute stress disorder . Acute stress disorder is a diagnostic category that can be used when symptoms develop shortly after experiencing a traumatic event and last for at least 2 days. The existence of this diagnosis means that people with symptoms do not have to wait a whole month to be diagnosed with PTSD. Instead they can receive treatment as soon as they experience symptoms (Cardeña & Carlson, 2011). Moreover, if symptoms persist beyond 4 weeks, the diagnosis can be changed from acute stress disorder to posttraumatic stress disorder. Stud- ies show that people who develop an acute stress disorder shortly after traumatic event are indeed at increased risk of developing PTSD (Kleim et al., 2007). This highlights the importance of early intervention. Of course, PTSD is not the only disorder that can develop after a traumatic experience. Bryant and colleagues (2010) con- ducted a prospective study of a large sample of people who were injured in accidents. They were assessed at the time of their injury and then followed up 3 and 12 months later. The investi- gators found that, 12 months after injury, 31 percent of patients reported a psychiatric disorder, and 22 percent of them had a disorder they had never experienced before. The most common disorders were depression (9%), generalized anxiety disorder (9%), and PTSD (6%).  Clinical Description  In PTSD a traumatic event is thought to cause a   pathologi- cal memory   that is at the center of the characteristic clinical symptoms associated with the disorder (McNally, 2013). These memories are often brief fragments of the experience and often concern events that happened just before the moment with the largest emotional impact (e.g., “Perpetrator standing at the window with the knife,” Hackman et al., 2004). In   DSM-5 , the clinical symptoms of PTSD are grouped into four main areas. These concern the following:  1.   Intrusion:   Recurrent reexperiencing of the traumatic event through nightmares, intrusive images, and physiological reactivity to reminders of the trauma. (In   DSM-IV   rumi- native thoughts about the trauma were also considered to reflect intrusion. This is not the case in   DSM-5 ).  2.   Avoidance:   Avoidance of thoughts, feelings or reminders of the trauma.  3.   Negative cognitions and mood:   This includes such symptoms as feelings of detachment as well as negative emotional states such as shame or anger, or distorted blame of oneself or others.  4.   Arousal and reactivity:   Hypervigilance, excessive response when startled, aggression, and reckless behavior. These are illustrated in the following case.  Abducted and Terrorized   Mr. A. was a married accountant, the father of two, in his early 30s. One night, while out running an errand, he was attacked by a group of young men. They forced him into their car and took him to a deserted country road. There they pulled him from the car and began beating and kicking him. They took his wallet, began taunting him about its contents (they had learned his name, his occupation, and the names of his wife and children), and threatened to go to his home and harm his family. Finally, after brutalizing him for several hours, they tied him to a tree. One man held a gun to his head. Mr. A. begged and pleaded for his life; then the armed assailant pulled the trigger. The gun was empty, but at the moment the trigger was pulled, Mr. A. defecated and urinated in his pants. Then the men untied him and left him on the road. Mr. A. slowly made his way to a gas station and called the police. [One of the authors] was called to examine him and did so at intervals for the next 2 years. The diagnosis was PTSD. Mr. A. had clearly experienced an event outside the range of normal human experience and was reexperiencing the event in various ways: intrusive recollections, nightmares, flashbacks, and extreme fear upon seeing groups of tough-looking young men. He was initially remarkably numb in other respects: He felt estranged and detached. He withdrew from his family, lost interest in his job, and expected to die in the near future. Mr. A. also showed symptoms of increased physiological arousal. His sleep was poor, he had difficulty concentrating, and he was easily startled. When Mr. A. first spoke about his abduction in detail he actually soiled himself at the moment he described doing so dur- ing the original traumatic experience. Mr. A. received treatment from a psychiatrist for the next 2 years. This consisted of twice-weekly individual psychotherapy as well as antidepressant medications. A focus of the therapy was the sense of shame and guilt Mr. A. felt over his behavior during his abduction. He wished he had been more stoic and had not pleaded for his life. With the help of his therapist, Mr. A. came to see that his murderous rage at his abductors was understandable, as was his desire for revenge. He was also able to accept that his response to his experience was likely similar to how others might have responded if faced with the same circumstances. By the end of treatment Mr. A. was almost without symptoms, although he still became somewhat anxious when he saw some groups of young men. Most important, his relationship with his wife and chil- dren was warm and close, and he was again interested in his work.  Prevalence of PTSD in the general Population  Estimates from the National Comorbidity Survey-Replication (NCS-R) suggest that the lifetime prevalence of PTSD in the United States is 6.8 percent (Kessler, Berglund, Demler, et al., 2005b). However, this figure obscures the sex difference in the prevalence of PTSD. The NCS-R data show that the lifetime
prevalence of PTSD is higher in women. Over the course of their lives, 9.7 percent of women and 3.6 percent of men will develop this disorder. The difference in the prevalence of PTSD in men and women is interesting, not least because studies show that men are much more likely to be exposed to traumatic events (Tolin & Foa, 2006). Some have suggested that the sex difference reflects the fact that women are more likely to be exposed to certain kinds of traumatic experiences, such as rape, that may be inher- ently more traumatic (Cortina & Kubiak, 2006). However, even when the type of traumatic event is controlled for, women still show higher rates of PTSD and tend to have more severe symp- toms (Tolin & Foa, 2006). This suggests that there are differ- ences between men and women that may determine their risk of developing PTSD after experiencing trauma.  rates of PTSD After Traumatic experiences  Disasters, both naturally occurring and human-caused, are far from rare occurrences. In a typical year countless people are exposed to the kinds of traumatic events that can cause PTSD. For example, more than 900 earthquakes with a magnitude between 5 and 8 on the Richter scale occur annually throughout the world (Naeem et al., 2011). Tsunamis also devastate coastal villages, and hurricanes, tornadoes, and floods destroy lives and livelihoods. Of course, some places are safer than others. Not surprisingly, rates of PTSD throughout the world tend to be lower in areas where people experience fewer natural disasters and where wars and organized violence are less common. Estimates of the prevalence of PTSD vary widely across dif- ferent studies (Sundin et al., 2010). One reason for this is that rates of PTSD seem to vary according to the type of trauma that is experienced. More specifically, traumatic events that result from human intent (such as rape) are more likely to cause PTSD than are traumatic events (such as accidents and natural disas- ters) that are not personal in nature (see Charuvastra & Cloitre, 2008). For example, Shalev and Freedman (2005) compared rates of PTSD after car accidents and after terrorist attacks in the same community in Israel. Interviews were conducted 1 week and 4 months after the traumatic event had occurred. Although there were no differences in the symptoms that people reported at the 1-week interview, at 4 months, rates of PTSD were much higher in the terrorist attack survivors than in those who had survived the car accidents. Traumatic events involving humans who do terrible things are perhaps even more difficult to come to terms with because they can destroy the sense of safety we often assume comes from being a member of a rule-abiding and lawful social group. Another factor that is crucially important with respect to the development of PTSD is the degree of direct exposure to the traumatic event. After reviewing all published disaster research over a 25 year period, Neria, Nandi, and Galea (2008) have estimated that rates of PTSD range between 30 and 40 percent for adults who are directly exposed to disasters. The prevalence of PTSD in rescue workers, on the other hand, tends to be lower (5–10%), probably because they are not directly exposed to the traumatic event when it is happening. Nonetheless, these figures highlight the risk of PTSD in rescue workers. They also show that disasters leave large numbers of traumatized people in their wakes. Finally, we should point out that difference in rates of PTSD across different studies may sometimes be linked to the way that PTSD is defined and the manner in which it is assessed. Estimates based on questionnaires tend to be higher than those based on clinical interviews. For example, in a study of Dutch veterans of the Iraq War, questionnaire assessments yielded rates of PTSD of 21 percent. However, when structured diagnostic interviews were used, only 4 percent of veterans met criteria for PTSD (Engelhard et al., 2007). Reasons for the overestimates when questionnaire measures are used include misunderstanding the meaning of items on the questionnaire, presence of symp- toms that cause little impairment in functioning, as well as inclu- sion of symptoms that began at times other than during or after a traumatic event.  The TrAUMA oF MiLiTAry CoMBAT   In a combat situation, with the continual threat of injury or death and repeated nar- row escapes, a person’s ordinary coping methods are relatively useless. The adequacy and security the person has known in the relatively safe and dependable civilian world are completely un- dermined. Combat brings with it constant fear, unpredictability,  Traumatic stressors include combat, rape, and experiencing a natural di- saster such as an earthquake, flood, tornado, or hurricane.
many uncontrollable circumstances, and the necessity of killing. Other factors may further contribute to the overall stress expe- rienced by soldiers. These include separations from loved ones, reductions in personal freedom, sleep deprivation, extreme and harsh climate conditions, and increased risk for disease. Many people who have been involved in the turmoil of war experience devastating psychological problems for months or even years afterward (Garakani et al., 2004). During World War I, traumatic reactions to combat conditions were called “shell shock,” a term coined by a British pathologist, Col. Frederick Mott (1919), who regarded these reactions as organic conditions produced by minute brain hemorrhages. It was gradually realized, however, that only a small percentage of such cases represented physical injury. Most victims were suffering instead from the general combat situation, with its physical fatigue, ever-present threat of death or mutilation, and severe psychological shocks. During World War II, traumatic reactions to combat were known as   operational fatigue   and   war neuroses , before finally being termed   combat fatigue   or   combat exhaustion   in the Korean and Vietnam Wars. Even the latter terms were none too aptly chosen because they implied that physical exhaustion played a more important role than was usually the case. It has been estimated that in World War II, 10 percent of Americans in combat developed combat exhaustion. How- ever, the actual incidence is not known because many soldiers received supportive therapy at their battalion aid stations and were returned to combat within a few hours. Recent evaluations of World War II psychiatric casualty files concluded that this practice of “forward psychiatry” was not effective at returning soldiers with shell shock to combat, but their improved mood and adjustment allowed them to be reassigned to noncombat roles, resulting in reduced manpower losses overall (Jones et al., 2007). In World War II, combat exhaustion was the greatest single cause of loss of personnel (Bloch, 1969).  MenTAL heALTh ConSeqUenCeS oF DePLoyMenT To irAq AnD AFghAniSTAn   Almost 2 million members of the Armed Forces have deployed for operations in Iraq and Afghanistan (Department of Defense, 2010). During these deployments they are exposed to many traumatic experiences and have to function under conditions of sustained threat. The overwhelming major- ity (92%) of Army soldiers and Marines in Iraq report that they have been attacked or ambushed, and 86 percent report knowing someone who has been killed or seriously injured (Hoge et al., 2004). Not surprisingly, this takes its toll on their mental health. The high prevalence of postdeployment mental disorders in these military personnel is now a major source of concern. One recent survey of over 289,328 Iraq and Afghanistan war veter- ans reported that 21.8 percent received diagnoses of PTSD and 17.4 percent were diagnosed with depression (Seal et al., 2009). Another study by Booth-Kewley and colleagues (2010) found that 17.1 percent of Marines reported symptoms of PTSD after deployment in Iraq or Afghanistan. These figures are higher than the rates of PTSD reported for veterans of the Vietnam War (12–16%; Thompson et al., 2006) and Gulf War (12%; Kang et al., 2003). They are also higher than rates of PTSD in UK military personnel following deployment to Iraq or Afghanistan (4.8%; see Iversen et al., 2009). In addition to PTSD and depres- sion, postdeployment rates of alcohol misuse and problems with aggression are also elevated (Thomas et al., 2010). The high prevalence of mental disorders in men and women returning from Iraq and Afghanistan may be a conse- quence of longer and more frequent deployments. Some brigade combat teams have been deployed three or four times (Thomas et al., 2010). But other factors may also be involved. In 2006 concerns were raised in the media that military psychiatrists had been sending mentally unfit service members into com- bat. Later that same year, minimal mental health standards for deployment were developed by the Department of Defense (Warner et al., 2011). A prospective longitudinal study has now confirmed that psychiatric problems measured predeployment significantly increase the risk of developing PTSD postdeploy- ment (Sandweiss et al., 2011). This highlights the importance of mental health screening prior to deployment and the need to provide additional resources and support for soldiers who may be most vulnerable. The most methodologically rigorous study of PTSD in members of the armed forces who served in Iraq or Afghanistan was conducted by Smith et al. (2008). This large longitudinal study excluded people who had PTSD prior to their deploy- ment. Overall, the rate of PTSD in the military personnel who were studied was 4.3 percent. As one might expect, the rate was higher (7.8%) for those exposed to combat and lower (1.4%) in those who did not have combat exposure. There is also evidence that theater-specific duties may be shaping some of the symptoms that veterans have. In addition to PTSD, clinicians are now seeing veterans with compulsive checking behaviors, as in the following case example.  Still Checking for Bombs   A 38-year-old married black army veteran of two deployments to Iraq came to the VA medical center stating, “My commanding officer suggested that I get help.” The patient’s primary duties during both of his tours included providing security for truck convoys by patrolling along- side them in an armed Humvee. In the course of his duties he was exposed to multiple life-threatening situations, witnessed an improvised explosive device detonate during a convoy, wit- nessed dead and mutilated bodies, witnessed a motor vehicle run over a little girl, and was responsible for checking the convoy trucks and accompanying vehicles for bombs. At the time of his contact with the clinic he was experiencing more than 10 direct intrusive memories. He engaged in avoidance through attempted thought suppression, doing his errands late at night to avoid people, and staying home as much as possible while not
at work. The patient also checked under the hood of his car for bombs every time he needed to drive. Although he knew that his checking was not normal and was embarrassed by it, he felt that the danger of someone placing a bomb under his car was too great not to check. Source: Adapted from Tuerk et al., 2009.  The military is also now trying to cope with another serious problem—soldier suicide. In the 5-year period from 2005 through 2009, more than 1,100 members of the Armed Forces took their own lives—a rate equivalent to one suicide every 36 hours (Department of Defense, 2010). Most of these suicides result from self-inflicted gunshot wounds. Suicide rates in the U.S. Army are especially high. Clay’s story serves as a tragic reminder of how destructive and invisible some of the wounds of war can be.  A Warrior Takes His Own Life   Clay was a handsome and friendly 28-year-old. A former Marine corporal, he received a Purple Heart after taking a bullet in Iraq and later returned to combat in Afghanistan. After his deployment was over Clay became involved in humanitarian work in Chile and Haiti. He lobbied in Washington to improve the disability claims process for veterans and was chosen to appear in a public service announcement to remind veterans that they were not alone. But Clay’s smiles and boundless energy were masks covering the emotional pain he lived with every day. Clay suffered from PTSD and depression. He also experienced survivor guilt, asking him- self why he had survived when many people he had served with had died. One day in the early spring, Clay locked the door of his apartment and shot himself. His death leaves a void in the lives of his family and friends. It also highlights the need for renewed efforts within the military to address the growing problem of sui- cide by members of the armed forces. (Based on Helfling, 2011).  PriSonerS oF WAr AnD hoLoCAUST SUrvivorS   Among the most stressful and persistently troubling wartime experiences is that of being a prisoner of war (Beal, 1995; Page et al., 1997). Although some people have been able to adjust to the stress (espe- cially when part of a supportive group), the toll on most prisoners is great. About 40 percent of the American prisoners in Japanese POW camps during World War II died during their imprison- ment; an even higher proportion of prisoners of Nazi concentra- tion camps died. Many survivors of Nazi concentration camps sustained residual organic and psychological damage, along with a lowered tolerance to stress of any kind. Symptoms were often extensive and commonly included anxiety, insomnia, headaches, irritability, depression, nightmares, impaired sexual potency, and diarrhea (which may accompany even relatively mild stress). Such symptoms were attributed not only to the psychological stressors but also to biological stressors such as head injuries, prolonged malnutrition, and serious infectious diseases (Sigal et al., 1973; Warnes, 1973). Among returning POWs, the effects of the psychological trauma they had experienced were often masked by the feelings of relief and jubilation that accompanied release from confine- ment. Even when there was little evidence of residual physical pathology, however, survivors of prisoner-of-war camps com- monly showed impaired resistance to physical illness, low frus- tration tolerance, dependence on alcohol and drugs, irritability, and other indications of emotional instability (Chambers, 1952; Goldsmith & Cretekos, 1969; Hunter, 1978; Strange & Brown, 1970; Wilbur, 1973). In a retrospective study of psychological maladjustment symptoms following repatriation, Engdahl and colleagues (1993) interviewed a large sample of former POWs and found that half of them reported symptoms that met standard criteria for PTSD in the year following their releases from captivity; nearly a third met PTSD criteria 40 to 50 years after their wartime experiences. Another measure of the toll taken by the prolonged stress of being in a POW or concentration camp is the higher death rate after return to civilian life. Among returning World War II POWs from the Pacific area, Wolff (1960) found that within the first 6 years, nine times as many died from tuberculosis as would have been expected in civilian life; four times as many from gas- trointestinal disorders; over twice as many from cancer, heart dis- ease, and suicide; and three times as many from accidents. Many problems of adjustment and posttraumatic symptoms can be found in POWs years after their release (Sutker & Allain, 1995).  PSyChoLogiCAL TrAUMA AMong viCTiMS oF TorTUre  Among the most highly stressful experiences human beings have reported are those inhuman acts perpetrated upon them by other human beings in the form of systematic torture. From the beginning of human history to the present, some people have subjected others to pain, humiliation, and degradation for politi- cal or inexplicable personal reasons (Jaranson & Popkin, 1998). History and literature are full of personal accounts of intense suf- fering and lifelong dread resulting from maltreatment by ruthless captors. In addition, several empirical studies have reported on the prevalence of torture in the modern world: Allden and col- leagues (1996) reported that 38 percent of Burmese political dis- sidents who escaped to Thailand had been tortured before their escape. Shrestha and colleagues (1998) compared Bhutanese survivors of torture in a Nepalese refugee camp with matched controls and found that torture survivors had more PTSD, anxiety, and depressive symptoms than the controls. Similar findings were reported by van Ommeren and colleagues (2001), who compared tortured and nontortured Bhutanese refugees and reported that those acknowledging being tortured had more PTSD and higher rates of lifetime mood and generalized anxiety disorders. Silove and colleagues (2002) also found higher PTSD
scores in a sample of Tamil torture victims living in Australia compared with refugees who had not been tortured. The case of Muhammad B. illustrates many of the symptoms that can follow systematic torture.  Muhammad B.’s Captivity   Muhammad B., a 21-year- old Ethiopian refugee, lives with his mother, father, two younger brothers, and two younger sisters in a small center-city apart- ment building in a large Midwestern city. He works part time as a parking lot attendant and attends night school, majoring in busi- ness. Muhammad has been in the United States for 5 years after a very tumultuous period in his home country. He was held for interrogation, along with several other young people from his village, in a government prison compound for several months when he was 15 years old. The treatment the captives received was severe, including starvation and frequent physical punish- ment. During a 7-month period of confinement, he was interro- gated, usually after a severe beating or after being shown the bodies of other prisoners, in an effort by his captors to obtain information about the whereabouts of antigovernment guerilla fighters. On one occasion he was questioned while one of the guards held a rifle barrel in his mouth, and on another occasion he was subjected to a “staged execution” in order to get him to talk. After the captors determined that he had no relevant infor- mation, he was released. His family was able to escape the country shortly afterward. Since his release from imprisonment, Muhammad has expe- rienced severe PTSD symptoms including night terrors, sleep- ing disturbances, attacks of intense anxiety, and depression. He reports almost constant headaches and pains in the hand that was broken by his captors. Although Muhammad has been able to complete high school successfully in the United States and has accumulated a year of college credit going to school part time, his day-to-day functioning is characterized by disabling intrusive thoughts, anxi- ety, nightmares, and recurring depression.  Other symptoms experienced after torture have been well documented (Başoğlu & Mineka, 1992; Carlsson et al., 2006). They include physical symptoms (such as pain, nervousness, insomnia, tremors, weakness, fainting, sweating, and diarrhea), psychological symptoms (such as night terrors and nightmares, depression, suspiciousness, social withdrawal and alienation, irritability, and aggressiveness), cognitive impairments (such as trouble concentrating, disorientation, confusion, and memory deficits), and disturbed behaviors (such as aggressiveness, impul- sivity, and suicidal attempts). Başoğlu and colleagues (1994) reported the results of a unique empirical study in which 55 former Turkish prisoners who were political activists and had been tortured were com- pared with 55 political activists who had not been tortured. The torture victims and control subjects were matched on demographic variables including age, gender, education level, ethnic status, and occupation. Standard assessment tech- niques, including a psychiatric interview and psychological tests, were also used. One of the most interesting findings from this study was the relatively low rate of PTSD (33 percent) in the political activists who had been tortured. This is especially remarkable because they had been imprisoned for an average of almost 4 years, endured nearly 300 episodes of torture, and been tortured in many different ways. Victims who were able to assert some ele- ment of cognitive control over the circumstances (for example, those who were able to predict and ready themselves for the pain they were about to experience) tended to be less affected over the long term (see Başoğlu & Mineka, 1992; Başoğlu et al., 1997). These investigators concluded that prior knowledge of and pre- paredness for torture, strong commitment to a cause, immuniza- tion against traumatic stress as a result of repeated exposure, and strong social supports have protective value against PTSD in survivors of torture.  Causal Factors in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  The study of causal risk factors that might be involved in the development of PTSD has been a controversial area (McNally, 2008). There are two major reasons for this. First, the very notion of PTSD makes it explicit that PTSD is caused by expe- riencing trauma. So why should we look any further if we wish to know what causes PTSD? The second concern is that, if some people are more likely to develop PTSD in the face of severe stress than other people are, might this not lead to double vic- timization, with victims of trauma also being stigmatized and being blamed for the troubles that they have? On the other side of the issue, we know that not everyone who is exposed to a traumatic event will develop PTSD. This suggests that some people may be more vulnerable to develop- ing PTSD than others. In order to prevent and better treat this disorder, we therefore need to understand more about the factors that are involved in its development. As we have already noted, the nature of the traumatic stressor and how directly it was experienced can account for much of the differences in stress response. For example, there is a close relationship between the total number of people killed and wounded and the number of psychiatric casualties in war (Jones & Wessely, 2002). Soldiers who report killing or being responsible for killing during their deployment are also more vulnerable to developing PTSD (Maguen, Lucenko et al., 2010b). If the level of stress is high enough, then, the average per- son can be expected to develop some psychological difficulties (which may be either short-lived or long term) following a traumatic event. But why is the breaking point of one person
different from the breaking point of another? Some of the answers may lie in factors that we have discussed earlier in this chapter. In the sections below, we highlight some areas that appear to be important.  individual risk Factors  When it comes to risk for PTSD, we need to keep two things in mind: As has been noted by researchers in this field, there is   risk for experiencing trauma   and there is also   risk for PTSD  given that there has been exposure to trauma (see McNally, 2013). Not everyone is at equal risk when it comes to the like- lihood that she or he will experience a traumatic event. Certain occupations, such as being a soldier or a firefighter, carry more risk than others, such as being a librarian. Risk factors that increase the likelihood of being exposed to trauma include being male, having less than a college education, having had conduct problems in childhood, having a family history of psy- chiatric disorder, and scoring high on measures of extraversion and neuroticism (Breslau et al., 1991, 1995). Rates of exposure to traumatic events are also higher for black Americans than they are for white Americans. Given that someone has been exposed to a traumatic event, what factors increase risk for   developing   PTSD? As we have already noted, being female is a risk factor. Other individual risk factors that have been identified by researchers include lower levels of social support, neuroticism (having a tendency to expe- rience negative affect), having preexisting problems with depres- sion and anxiety, as well as having a family history of depression, anxiety, and also substance abuse (see McNally, 2013; Wilk, Bliese, et al. 2010). Also relevant are the appraisals people make of their own stress symptoms shortly after the trauma. If people believe that their symptoms are a sign of personal weakness or if they believe that others will be ashamed of them because they are experiencing symptoms, they are at increased risk for developing PTSD, even when the level of initial symptoms is statistically controlled (Dunmore et al., 2001). On the other side of the coin, are there factors that may be   protective   and buffer against PTSD? Good cognitive ability seems to be important here. Breslau et al., (2006) collected IQ data from 6-year-old children who lived in and around Detroit. When these children reached the age of 17, they were inter- viewed and assessed both for exposure to trauma and for PTSD. The children who at age 6 had IQ scores above 115 were less likely to have experienced a traumatic event by age 17; further- more, if they   had   been exposed to trauma, they were at lower risk for developing PTSD. These findings suggest that having a higher IQ may be protective against experiencing trauma and developing PTSD because children who had average or below- average IQ scores were at similar risk for PTSD. Similar findings have also been reported for Vietnam veter- ans. Kremen and colleagues (2007) collected information from a large sample of twins and also obtained information about their cognitive ability scores before they went to serve in Vietnam. All of the men involved in the study were subsequently exposed to traumatic events during their military service. Compared with men who had scored in the lowest quartile on the Armed Forces Qualification Test (a measure of cognitive ability), men who had scored in the highest quartile had a 48 percent   lower risk   of developing PTSD. Why might higher pretrauma cognitive abilities provide protection against PTSD? One possibility is that individuals with more intellectual resources might be better able to create some meaning from their traumatic experiences and translate them into a personal narrative of some kind. Earlier in this chapter, we discussed the therapeutic benefits of systematically writing about distressing events (Pennebaker, 1997). Perhaps people with higher cognitive abilities are more naturally able to incorporate their traumatic experiences into their life nar- ratives in ways that are ultimately adaptive and emotionally protective.  BioLogiCAL FACTorS   Given that PTSD is a stress disorder, it might be expected that people with this disorder would have high levels of stress hormones such as cortisol. However, this does not generally seem to be the case (Young & Breslau, 2004). Under conditions of imposed experimental stress (trauma reminders, cognitive challenges), people with PTSD do seem to show an exaggerated cortisol response (de Kloet et al., 2006). However, baseline levels of cortisol are often very similar in people with PTSD compared to those of healthy controls (Meewisse et al., 2007). Gender may be an important factor here, however. Women with PTSD do seem to have higher levels of baseline cortisol than women without PTSD. This is not so for men with and without PTSD. Another interesting finding is that levels of corti- sol tend to be lower in people with PTSD who have experienced physical or sexual abuse. In other words, the type of trauma may be an important factor (Meewisse et al., 2007). Although many  Certain occupations place people at higher risk of experiencing a traumatic event.
of the findings in this area are confusing, researchers are still exploring biological dysregulations in PTSD. Another focus of research interest is gene–environment interactions. Earlier we discussed how people with a particular form of a particular gene (the 5HTTLPR, or serotonin trans- porter gene) seem to be more at risk for developing depres- sion in the face of four or more life events. Data now suggest that this gene may also be a risk factor for the development of PTSD. Kilpatrick and colleagues (2007) collected DNA data and interviewed 589 adults from Florida 6 to 9 months after the 2004 hurricane season. The prevalence of post-hurricane PTSD in the sample overall was 3.2 percent. Risk factors for develop- ing PTSD were a high level of exposure to the hurricanes and low levels of social support. However, people who had the high-risk (s/s) genotype of the serotonin-transporter gene were at especially high risk for the development of PTSD if they   also  had high hurricane exposure   and   low social support. For those in this group, the rate of PTSD was 14.8 percent—4.5 times higher. People with the s/s genotype were also more likely to develop depression if they had high hurricane exposure and low social support. These findings suggest that having the s/s form of the serotonin-transporter gene makes a bad situation worse. People with this genotype may be especially susceptible to the effects of traumatic stress, particularly if they also have low lev- els of social support. What do we know about the brains of people with PTSD? Studies show that a brain area called the hippocampus seems to be reduced in size in people with PTSD. The hippocampus is a brain area known to be involved in memory. It is also a brain area known to be responsive to stress. In a landmark study, Gilbertson and colleagues (2002) measured the volume of the hippocampus in combat veterans with and without PTSD. The results showed that the veterans with PTSD had smaller hip- pocampal volumes than did the veterans without PTSD. The reason this study is so important, however, is that all the men were MZ (identical) twins. And when Gilbertson and colleagues looked at the volume of the hippocampus in the healthy co- twins of the combat veterans with PTSD, they found that these men   also had small hippocampal volumes , just like their brothers. In contrast, the combat veterans who did not have PTSD, as well as their twins (who had not been involved in combat), had similar (and larger) hippocampal volumes. What these findings suggest, then, is that for reasons we do not yet understand, small hippocampal volume may be a vulnerability factor for develop- ing PTSD in people who are exposed to trauma. A major problem with research in this area is that many of the brain abnormalities associated with PTSD (including reduced hippocampal size) are also found in people who are depressed. Because PTSD and depression are highly comorbid and co-occurring disorders, it is therefore hard for research- ers to be sure which brain abnormalities are specific to PTSD and which might stem from depression (Kroes et al., 2011). But perhaps it is a bit naïve to expect that PTSD would be associated with brain abnormalities that are completely unique and distinct and that are not shared with any other disorders. We know that stress plays a role in the development of depres- sion and the development of PTSD. We also know that stress (via glucocorticoids) has a negative impact on brain areas (like hippocampus) that are important for healthy emotional func- tioning. Why then should we not expect to see some common- alities when we look at people who have disorders in which stress is implicated?  Sociocultural Factors  Being a member of a minority group seems to place people at higher risk for developing PTSD. DiGrande and colleagues (2011) studied 3,271 civilians who were evacuated from the World Trade Center towers on September 11, 2001. Two to three years after the attacks 15 percent of people were assessed as having PTSD. Compared with whites, African American and Hispanic survivors were more likely to have PTSD. Echoing the discussion of resilience earlier in this chapter, being more edu- cated and having a higher annual income were also factors associ- ated with lower rates of PTSD overall. Returning to a negative and unsupportive social environ- ment can also increase vulnerability to posttraumatic stress (Charuvastra & Cloitre, 2008). For example, in a 1-year follow- up of Israeli men who had been psychiatric war casualties during the Yom Kippur War, Merbaum (1977) found that not only did these men continue to show extreme anxiety, depression, and extensive physical complaints, but (in many instances) they also appeared to become more disturbed over time. Merbaum hypothesized that the men’s further psychological deterioration was due to the negative attitudes of the community. In a country so reliant on the strength of its army for its survival, considerable stigma is attached to psychological breakdown in combat. Because of this stigma, many of the men were experiencing not only isola- tion within their communities but also self-recrimination about what they perceived as their own failure. These feelings exacer- bated the soldiers’ already stressful situations. Sociocultural variables also appear to play a role in determin- ing a person’s adjustment to combat. Important factors include justification for the combat and how clear and acceptable the war’s goals are to the person whose life is being put in harm’s way (Hoge et al., 2004). Identification with the combat unit and quality of leadership also make a difference (Jones & Wessely, 2007). Today, military psychiatrists apply techniques that have been learned over the past century to help reduce psychological casual- ties. Interventions that promote morale and encourage cohesion that were developed in World War II and the Korean and Viet- nam Wars have proved effective at reducing psychological casual- ties occurring among U.S. troops during their deployments to the Afghanistan and Iraqi war zones (Ritchie, 2007). Strategically placed combat stress control teams deploy as soon as is practical after combat engagements to provide timely counseling to troops. To improve morale of troops, the military also made efforts to
provide breaks from long engagements by having “safe” zones that include such improvements as air conditioning, regular mail delivery, and good food. One of the most effective morale build- ers among troops has been the availability of the Internet at most established facilities in both Iraq and Afghanistan.  Long-Term effects of Posttraumatic Stress  As we have already noted, soldiers who have experienced com- bat exhaustion may show symptoms of posttraumatic stress for sustained periods of time (Shalev, 2009; Solomon & Mikulincer, 2007). If it develops, PTSD can be a severe and chronic condi- tion. Moreover, in some cases, soldiers who stood up exception- ally well during their deployments have experienced delayed PTSD upon their return home. The difficulties readjusting to life as a civilian after extended periods away from home cannot be underestimated. Feelings of responsibility associated with kill- ing as well as feelings of guilt for having survived when friends and unit peers did not may also play a role here. The nature and extent of PTSD is somewhat controversial, however (McNally, 2008). The delayed version of PTSD is less well defined and more difficult to diagnose than disorders that emerge shortly after the precipitating incident (Andrews et al., 2007). Moreover, with the exception of Vietnam vet- erans, cases of delayed-onset PTSD are exceedingly rare, with only one case of delayed PTSD being reported in a civilian study (Breslau et al., 1991). Reports of delayed stress syndrome among Vietnam combat veterans are often difficult to relate explicitly to combat stress because these people may also have other significant adjustment problems. Some authorities have questioned whether a delayed reaction should be diagnosed as PTSD at all; instead, some would categorize such a reaction as some other anxiety-based disorder. For example, people with adjustment difficulties may erroneously attribute their present problems to specific incidents from their past, such as experi- ences in combat. Also troubling are findings that show that 7 percent of men seeking treatment for combat-related PTSD had either never served in Vietnam or had not been in the military at all (Frueh et al., 2005). The wide publicity given to delayed PTSD and the potential for receiving service-connected disability payments may be relevant factors here. Based on their analysis of a large federal database, a group of labor economists has concluded that the enormous increase in PTSD disability claims made by Vietnam veterans results more from financial need than it does from psy- chiatric disorder (Agrist, Chen & Frandsen, 2010).  in review  •   What is the main difference between acute stress disorder and PTSD?  •   What risk factors are associated with experiencing trauma?  •   What risk factors are implicated in the development of PTSD?  •   Why might high IQ be protective against PTSD?  •   How might genetic factors play a role in the development of PTSD?  •   What is controversial about the diagnosis of delayed PTSD?  Prevention and Treatment of Stress Disorders  Prevention  One way to prevent PTSD is to reduce the frequency of trau- matic events. Although natural disasters are inevitable, efforts could be made to reduce the access that adolescents have to firearms. This could reduce the frequency of school violence and shootings. Other changes in the law and in social policy might also yield beneficial effects. It is also worth considering whether it is possible to prevent maladaptive responses to stress by preparing people in advance and providing them with information and coping skills. As we noted earlier, this approach has been found to be helpful for people experiencing the stress of major surgery. Other research further supports the idea that psychological preparedness can fos- ter resilience in political activists who are arrested and tortured (Başoğlu et al., 1997). Adequate training and preparation for extreme stressors may also help soldiers, firefighters, and others for whom exposure to traumatic events is highly likely. Findings from a study that examined PTSD in rescue and recovery work- ers at the World Trade Center site are consistent with this (Perrin, DiGrande et al., 2007). Rates of PTSD differed mark- edly across occupations, with lower rates being reported in police (6.2 percent) and the highest rates being found in volunteers (21.2 percent) who had occupations that were completely unre- lated to rescue and recovery work (e.g., finance or real estate). The use of cognitive-behavioral techniques to help people manage potentially stressful situations or difficult events has been widely explored (Brewin & Holmes, 2003). This preventive strategy, often referred to as   stress-inoculation training , prepares people to tolerate an anticipated threat by changing the things  Having access to the Internet improves the morale of soldiers during long deployments.
they say to themselves before or during a stressful event. As help- ful as these approaches are, however, it is almost impossible to be prepared psychologically for most disasters or traumatic situations, which by their nature are often unpredictable and uncontrollable. Given this, what might be done to help people who have just experienced a traumatic event? How might we reduce risk for PTSD? Strange as it may seem, there is reason to believe that playing Tetris might have some benefits (see The World Around Us box above).  Treatment for Stress Disorders  As we have already discussed, many people who are exposed to a traumatic stressor will experience symptoms and then gradually begin to recover without any professional help. After the terrorist attacks at the World Trade Center, grief and crisis counselors flocked to New York City because it was expected that countless numbers of people would be seeking psychological assistance. Relatively few people sought professional help, however, and millions of dollars that had been allocated to cover the costs of providing free counseling went unspent (McNally et al., 2003). With time, and with the help of friends and family, it is quite typical for traumatized people to recover naturally.  TeLePhone hoTLineS   National and local telephone hotlines provide help for people under severe stress and for people who are suicidal. In addition, there are specific hotlines for victims of rape and sexual assault and for runaways who need help. Many of these hotlines are staffed by volunteers. How skilled  the World around us  Does Playing Tetris After a Traumatic Event Reduce Flashbacks?  F lashbacks,” or intrusive memories, are a hallmark feature of PTSD. They often involve visual experiences where the person reexperiences the traumatic event. Because of this flashbacks can be very frightening. But can flashbacks be prevented? In a clever and creative study, Holmes and colleagues (2009) exposed a group of research participants to 12 minutes of graphic film footage depicting scenes of injury and death. Thirty minutes after seeing the footage, some participants played Tetris for 10 minutes while others (control condition) sat quietly for the same period of time. All participants then used a diary to record the number of flashbacks they experienced over the course of the following week. Compared to the participants in the control condition, those people who played Tetris after viewing the trauma film reported significantly fewer involuntary flashbacks (4.6 versus 12.8 for controls). But why should this be? Forming a memory involves a neuro- biological process. But in the early stages of this process (within the first six hours) the memory consolidation process can be dis- rupted. The brain also has a limited capacity. Because Tetris is a visuospatial task, playing Tetris shortly after the traumatic expe- rience may disrupt the consolidation of traumatic visual memo- ries. In other words, the new images of Tetris compete with the earlier visual images from the film, making the visual memories of the film less strong. In other work, this same group of researchers have shown that simply being distracted after viewing the traumatic film does not reduce the frequency of later flashbacks (Holmes et al., 2010). In fact, participants who were assigned to a verbal task condition (playing Pub Quiz—a general knowledge, verbal computer game) showed an   increased   number of flashbacks compared to both the group that played Tetris and the group that did nothing. Taken together, the results of these interesting studies support the possibility that simple visuospatial tasks such as Tetris might have promise as a “cognitive vaccine” if they can be adminis- tered early enough. Importantly, although they experienced fewer intrusive flashbacks, people who played Tetris were still able to recall as many details from the film as people in the control group. In other words, their factual memories of the film remained intact. This is obviously important from the perspec- tive of legal proceedings, where victims of trauma might need to testify about the events that they had experienced. “  People who played Tetris after viewing a traumatic film reported fewer involuntary flashbacks the following week.
and knowledgeable the volunteer is plays an important role in how satisfied users are with the hotline (Finn et al., 2010). Studies also suggest that the most positive outcomes come when helpers show empathy and respect for callers (Mishara et al., 2007).  CriSiS inTervenTion   Crisis intervention   has emerged in response to especially stressful situations, be they disasters or family situations that have become intolerable (Brown, et al., 2013; Callahan, 2009; Krippner et al., 2012). Short-term cri- sis therapy is of brief duration and focuses on the immediate problem with which an individual or family is having difficulty (Scott & Stradling, 2006). Although medical problems may also require emergency treatment, therapists are concerned here with problems of an emotional nature. A central assumption in crisis-oriented therapy is that the individual was functioning well psychologically before the trauma. Thus therapy is focused only on helping the person through the immediate crisis, not on “re- making” her or his personality. In such crisis situations, a therapist is usually very active, helping to clarify the problem, suggesting plans of action, providing reassurance, and otherwise providing needed infor- mation and support. A single-session behavioral treatment has been shown to lower fears and provide an increased sense of control among earthquake trauma victims (Başoğlu et al., 2007). Although people are far from better after this single session, they receive knowledge and learn skills that will help them gain better control over their lives in the ensuing weeks and months.  Psychological Debriefing  Psychological debriefing approaches are designed to help and speed up the healing process in people who have experienced disasters or been exposed to other traumatic situations (Day, 2007). As a central strategy, traumatized victims are provided with emotional support and encouraged to talk about their experiences during the crisis (Dattilio & Freeman, 2007). The discussion is usually quite structured, and common reac- tions to the trauma are normalized. Some believe that this form of counseling (much of which is conducted by people who are not mental health professionals) should be mandated for disaster victims in order to prevent PTSD (Conlon & Fahy, 2001). Indeed, a small industry has sprung up to provide debriefing services, and disaster scenes are often swarmed by well-intentioned service providers—many of whom have little or no mental health training. One form of psychological debriefing is Critical Incident Stress Debriefing (CISD; see McNally et al., 2003). A single ses- sion of CISD lasts between 3 and 4 hours and is conducted in a group format, usually 2 to 10 days after a “critical incident” or trauma. Psychological debriefing is currently quite controversial. Reviews of the literature have generally failed to support the clinical effectiveness of the approach (Bisson et al., 2009; Dev- illy et al., 2006; McNally et al., 2003). Although those who experience the   debriefing sessions   often report satisfaction with the procedure and with the organization’s desire to provide assistance, no well-controlled study has shown that it reduces symptoms of PTSD or hastens recovery in civilians (see Adler et al., 2008). Clearly, trauma survivors should not be left alone to pick up the pieces of their lives. As we noted earlier, lack of social support is a risk factor for the development of PTSD. More- over, providing the right kind of social support may facilitate recovery. The most appropriate crisis intervention methods may not be those that follow an explicit protocol and urge emotional expression even when the trauma survivor is not ready. Rather, the most beneficial interventions may be those that focus explic- itly on the needs of the individual and time their approaches accordingly. As Foa (cited in McNally et al., 2003) has wisely suggested, in the aftermath of a trauma, survivors should follow their own natural inclination and talk (or not talk) with the peo- ple they want to talk to. In a related vein, therapists should take their lead from the trauma survivor, engaging in active listening, being supportive, but not directing or pushing for more informa- tion than the survivor wishes to provide. Caring, kindness, and common sense can go a long way to helping trauma survivors along the path to healing.  MeDiCATionS   As we have seen, persons experiencing trau- matic situations usually report intense feelings of anxiety or depression, numbing, intrusive thoughts, and sleep disturbance. Several medications can be used to provide relief for intense PTSD symptoms. Antidepressants, for example, are sometimes helpful in alleviating PTSD symptoms of depression, intrusion, and avoidance (Reinecke et al., 2007). In some cases, antipsy- chotic medications, like those used to treat disorders such as schizophrenia, are used (Bartzokis et al., 2005; David et al.,  In the immediate aftermath of a crisis, people need practical assistance as well as emotional support.
2004). However, there is still some doubt about the extent to which medications are effective in the treatment of PTSD symptoms (Ehlers, 2000; Jaranson et al., 2001).  CogniTive-BehAviorAL TreATMenTS   If you watch a scary movie over and over again what happens? Over time, the fear decreases and the movie becomes less frightening to you. One behaviorally oriented treatment strategy that is now being used for PTSD is   prolonged exposure   (Cloitre, 2009). It operates on exactly the same principle. The patient is asked to vividly recount the traumatic event over and over until there is a decrease in his or her emotional responses. This procedure also involves repeated or extended exposure, either in vivo or in the imagination, to feared (but objec- tively harmless) stimuli that the patient is avoiding because of trauma-related fear (Foa & Rauch, 2004; Powers et al., 2010). Prolonged exposure can also be supplemented by other behavioral techniques (Taylor, 2010). For example, relaxation training might also be used to help the person manage anxiety following a traumatic event. Because prolonged exposure therapy involves persuading clients to confront the traumatic memories they fear, the thera- peutic relationship may be of great importance in this kind of clinical intervention (Charuvastra & Cloitre, 2008). The client has to trust in the therapist enough to engage in the exposure treatment. In all clinical work, it is important that the therapist provides a safe, warm, and supportive environment that can facilitate clinical change. For those who have been traumatized, and who may have extreme issues with trust, having a capable, understanding, and caring therapist may be especially necessary. Prolonged exposure is an effective treatment for PTSD (Doane et al., 2010; Powers et al., 2010). In a recent study involving women who had served in the military, ten 90-min- ute treatment sessions led to a reduction of symptoms and a decrease in the number of women meeting diagnostic criteria for PTSD compared to a sample of women who had received a form of treatment that focused on their current life problems  the World around us  Virtual Reality Exposure Treatment for PTSD in Military Personnel  L arge numbers of military personnel begin showing signs of PTSD within 6 months of de- ploying (Milliken et al., 2007). However, because of stigma, many soldiers are reluctant to seek help. As one Marine explained, “I didn’t want it put on my mili- tary record that I was crazy” (Halpern, 2008). A much-needed development in this regard is the use of computer simulations and virtual reality to provide a form of exposure therapy. Although such approaches are not new, technological advances now allow for the virtual reality programs to be cus- tomized to reflect the individual soldier’s traumatic experience as closely as possible. With the click of a mouse, the therapist can add such trauma- related cues as vibrations of the ground, the smell of smoke, and the sound of AK-47 fire. Treatment is typically short term (4 weeks), consisting of four to six 90- minute individual sessions. The first session is devoted to obtaining sufficient details of the trauma (time of day, weather conditions, location, sounds, smells, etc.) to make the virtual reality experience as realistic as possible. As the therapy progresses, new cues may be added to the program to provide further exposure experiences. Early reports suggest that virtual reality exposure treatment is associated with substantial decreases in PTSD symptoms and im- provements in overall functioning (Gerardi et al., 2008; Reger & Gahm, 2008). Importantly, virtual reality treatment approaches are also well received by soldiers and preferred over traditional talk therapy (Wilson et al., 2008). As one soldier put it, virtual reality “sounded pretty cool” (see Halpern, 2008). Given the growing numbers of veterans now being diagnosed with PTSD, any form of treatment that is well received by soldiers and provides relief from debilitating symptoms cannot come a moment too soon. Virtual reality treatment is well received by soldiers.
(Schnurr et al., 2007). However, one problem with prolonged exposure therapy is that it tends to have a higher dropout rate than other approaches. This no doubt is because it is difficult for people with PTSD to be exposed to their traumatic memo- ries. Another current issue of concern is how long the treat- ment effects last. In the study just described, the longer-term effects of the prolonged exposure treatment were less robust than expected. Recognizing the need for improvements in the treatment of PTSD, other approaches are now being developed. Ehlers and colleagues (2005) have developed a treatment for PTSD that is based on a cognitive model of the disorder. More specifically, it is thought that PTSD becomes persistent when people who have experienced trauma make excessively negative and idiosyncratic appraisals of what has happened to them in a way that creates a sense of a serious, current threat. For example, a bus driver who was assaulted by one of his passengers believed he was a terrible father who had failed his children because he had asked the pas- senger to buy a ticket before the passenger attacked him (Ehlers & Clark, 2008). Cognitive therapy for PTSD is designed to modify excessively negative appraisals of the trauma or its consequences, decrease the threat that patients experience when they have mem- ories of the traumatic event, and remove problematic cognitive and behavioral strategies. Evidence suggests that this treatment approach is very effective. In three different studies comparing patients who received cognitive therapy with patients assigned to a waiting list control group, rates of recovery were significantly higher in the cognitive therapy group and ranged from 71 to 89 percent. The drop-out rate was also very low. In fact, the only patient who dropped out of the treatment was a woman who moved abroad (Ehlers & Clark, 2008). Moreover, these treatment gains appear to continue after treatment has ended. Another exciting new treatment development that seems to be well received by clients is virtual reality exposure therapy (see The World Around Us box above).  Challenges in Studying Disaster victims  Conducting research into disasters is extremely difficult to implement for a number of reasons. It is virtually impossible to have an ideal, well-controlled, and well-funded experiment set up “awaiting a disaster.” One cannot easily predict natu- ral disasters such as a tornado or fire, so it is difficult to have qualified staff ready to conduct the research immediately after the disaster strikes. Good research also requires careful defini- tion of the variables concerned and meticulous attention to methodological detail. But in disaster situations the extraneous conditions are difficult if not impossible to control. Often in disaster situations (e.g., airplane crashes), therapy sessions are conducted in noisy, makeshift locations such as crew lounges, hallways, and gate areas. Moreover, federal disaster funds are typically only available for immediate intervention and cannot be used for long-term care or evaluation research (Pfefferbaum et al., 1999). All of these factors make it difficult to learn how best to help people who have been traumatized or who are in crisis. Nonethe- less, a great deal of good research is now being conducted. The more we understand the mechanisms through which trauma can create pathological memories that will not abate, the more we will be able to help the large numbers of people who need help both now and in the future.  Trauma and Physical health  If stress is linked to problems with physical health, what role does trauma play in our physical well-being? In asking this ques- tion we come full circle, recognizing the impor tance of the mind–body connection. Although questions like this are only now beginning to attract empirical attention, we end with an interesting finding: In a sample of HIV-positive men and women, previous trauma (occurring years before the study and usually during childhood) was highly predictive of death from HIV and also from other causes (Leserman et al., 2007). In other words, traumatic events are not only bad for the mind. A history of trauma also predicts mortality. Although the mechanisms for this are far from clear, they again highlight the role that stress and trauma play in both physical health and psychological well-being.  in review  •   What strategies are useful for preventing or reducing maladap- tive responses to stress?  •   Describe crisis intervention therapy. How is this treatment approach different from psychotherapy for other mental health conditions?  •   In what ways are medications used in treating individuals in crisis?  •   Describe the current controversy surrounding the use of “debriefing interventions.”  •   What forms of cognitive-behavioral treatments are effective for patients with PTSD?  •   Why is the therapeutic relationship so important in the treatment of chronic PTSD?
5.1   What is stress?  •   When challenges to our physical or emotional well being exceed our coping abilities or resources, we experience stress. Stress can result from negative or positive situations. Key factors involved in making one situation more stressful than another include how severe the stressor is, how long it lasts, when it occurs, how much it impacts our lives, how expected it is and how much control we have over the situation.  •   Stress takes its toll on our physical and psychological well-being.  5.2   how does the body respond to stress?  •   When we are stressed, the autonomic nervous system responds in a variety of ways. One consequence of stress is increased production of cortisol. High levels of this stress hormone may be beneficial in the short term but problematic over the longer term.  •   Stress compromises immune functioning. Psychoneuroimmunology is a developing field concerned with the interactions between the nervous system and the immune system  •   In the immune system, specialized white blood cells called B-cells and T-cells respond to antigens such as viruses and bac- teria. They are assisted by natural killer cells, granulocytes, and macrophages.  •   Cytokines are chemical messengers that allow the brain and the immune system to communicate with each other. Some cytokines respond to a challenge to the immune system by causing an inflammatory response. Other cytokines, called anti- inflammatory cytokines, dampen the response that the immune system makes when it is challenged.  5.3   What role does our emotional state play in our physical health?  •   Negative emotional states, such as being under a lot of stress or having low social support, can impair the functioning of the immune system and the cardiovascular system, leaving a person  summary 5  UNresolved issues  Why Is the Study of Trauma so Contentious?  U nlike other research topics, the field of traumatic stress study is characterized by passionate and highly divisive argument. For example, although researchers routinely seek to identify risk factors for the development of various disorders such as depression or eating disorders, the idea that there could be individual risk factors for PTSD (apart from exposure to the traumatic event itself) was a taboo topic for many years. The reason it was unacceptable was because it was viewed as “blaming the victim.” There were also concerns that the study of vulnerability factors might provide the federal government with an excuse to deny treatment and benefits to Vietnam veterans. In other words, advocacy, rather than science was the priority. Now, of course, the study of individual vulnerability factors for PTSD is an active area of research. Nonetheless, individual scien- tists in this area are still subjected to attacks when they present findings that some in the trauma field do not want to hear (Satel, 2007). A case in point is the reanalysis of data from the National Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study. This suggested that the originally reported estimates of PTSD might have been too high. Rather than engage in discourse about the methodology of the study or the statistical analysis used, prominent members of the audience instead chose to attack the presenter, coming close to accusing him of lying (Satel, 2007). This is not an isolated example. After scholars published a meta- analysis that revealed that there was only a weak association between childhood sexual abuse and later psychopathology (Rind, Tromovitch & Bauserman, 1998) there was a huge outcry from experts in the trauma field. The American Psychological Association made efforts to distance itself from the conclusions made by the authors and eventually Congress weighed in, issuing a formal condemnation of the article (see Lilienfield, 2002). In another case, some scholars were accused of “minimization or outright denial of human suffering” (Marshall, 2006, p. 629) after they referred to the transient rise in stress reactions following the 9/11 terrorist attacks as normal emotional responses (see McNally, 2013). Science searches for truth. And, as McNally (2013) notes, advo- cacy for victims of trauma is best served by scientific inquiry that is free of ideology. If certain assumptions are off-limits to inves- tigation or critique, no one is well served. Advocates for trauma victims are no doubt well-intentioned. But when advocacy deter- mines what scientific findings are or are not acceptable, do we not all lose?
key terms  acute stress disorder   148  adjustment disorder   145  allostatic load   134  antigens   134  B-cell   134  behavioral medicine   129  coping strategies   130  correlational research   study   136  cortisol   133  crisis   132  crisis intervention   157  cytokines   135  debriefing sessions   157  distress   130  essential hypertension   138  health psychology   129  hypertension   138  hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (hPA) system   133  immune system   134  immunosuppression   134  leukocytes   134  lymphocytes   134  positive psychology   137  posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)   129  prolonged exposure   158  psychoneuroimmunology   134  resilience   132  stress   130  stress-inoculation training   155  stress tolerance   131  stressors   130  sympathetic-adrenomedullary (SAM) system   133  T-cell   134  Type A behavior pattern   140  Type D personality   141 more vulnerable to disease, infection, and problems such as hypertension and cardiovascular disease.  •   Many physical illnesses seem to be linked to chronic negative emotions such as anger, anxiety, and depression. Hostility is well established as an independent risk factor for CHD. The same is true of depression.  5.4   What mental disorders are explicitly recognized as being triggered by stress?  •   The   DSM-5   classifies people’s psychological problems in response to stressful situations under two general categories: adjustment disorders and posttraumatic stress disorder.  •   Several relatively common stressors (prolonged unemployment, loss of a loved one through death, and marital separation or divorce) may produce a great deal of stress and psychological mal- adjustment, resulting in adjustment disorder.  •   More intense psychological disorders in response to trauma or excessively stressful situations (such as military combat, being held hostage, or torture) may be categorized as posttraumatic stress disorder.  •   A new diagnostic category called “Trauma- and stressor-related disorders has been added to   DSM-5 . Several disorders (including PTSD) that were formally in the Anxiety Disorders section of the  DSM   have been moved into this new category  5.5   What are the clinical features of posttraumatic stress disorder?  •   PTSD can involve a variety of symptoms including intrusive memories or recurrent and distressing dreams about the event, avoidance of stimuli associated with the trauma, negative cogni- tions or impaired memory about aspects of the traumatic event, and increased arousal or reactivity.  •   Many factors influence a person’s response to stressful situations. The impact of stress depends not only on its severity but also on the person’s preexisting vulnerabilities. Resilience is the most common long-term trajectory.  •   Although it is very common to experience psychological symptoms after a traumatic event, these often fade with time. Most people exposed to traumatic events do not develop PTSD. The prevalence of PTSD in the general population is 6.8 percent.  •   If symptoms begin 6 months or more after the traumatic event, the diagnosis is delayed posttraumatic stress disorder.  5.6   What are the risk factors for PTSD?  •   Factors that increase a person’s risk of experiencing traumatic events include certain occupations (e.g., firefighter), being male, not having a college education, conduct problems in childhood, high levels of extraversion and neuroticism, as well as a family history of psychiatric problems.  •   Factors that increase the risk of developing PTSD are being female and having low levels of social support; higher levels of neuroticism; a family history of depression, anxiety, and sub- stance abuse; as well as preexisting problems with anxiety and depression.  •   Women with PTSD have higher baseline cortisol levels than women who do not have PTSD. This is not the case for men with PTSD. Under conditions of stress, people with PTSD show an exaggerated cortisol response.  •   Having the s/s genotype of the serotonin-transporter gene may increase vulnerabilty to PTSD in the face of trauma exposure. Smaller hippocampal volume is also a biological vulnerability factor.  5.7   What treatment approaches are used for PTSD?  •   Medications are sometimes used in the treatment of PTSD. Psychological treatments include prolonged exposure therapy and cognitive therapy. A new approach that appears promising is the use of virtual reality exposure therapy.
learning objectives  6.1  What are the essential features of anxiety disorders?  6.2  Describe the clinical features of specific and social phobias.  6.3  Why do anxiety disorders develop?  6.4  What are the clinical features of panic disorder?  6.5  What factors are implicated in the development of panic disorder?  6.6  Describe the clinical aspects of generalized anxiety disorder.  6.7  How are anxiety disorders treated?  6.8  What are the clinical features of obsessive-compulsive disorder and how is this disorder treated?  6.9  Describe three obsessive-compulsive related disorders.  Leni: Worried About Worrying So Much   Leni is a 24-year-old graduate student. Although she is doing exceptionally well in her program, for the past year she has worried constantly that she will fail and be thrown out. When her fellow students and profes- sors try to reassure her, Leni worries that they are just pretending to be nice to her because she is such a weak student. Leni also worries about her mother becoming ill and about whether she is really liked by her friends. Although Leni is able to acknowledge that her fears are excessive (she has supportive friends, her mother is in good health, and, based on her grades, Leni is one of the top students in her program), she still struggles to control her worrying. Leni has difficulty sleeping, often feels nervous and on edge, and experiences a great deal of muscle tension. When her friends suggested she take a yoga class to try and relax, Leni even began to worry about that, fearing that she would be the worse student in the class. “I know it makes no sense,” she says, “But that’s how I am. I’ve always been a worrier. I even worry about worrying so much!”  Anxiety   involves a general feeling of apprehension about possible future danger, and   fear   is an alarm reaction that occurs in response to immediate danger. Today the   DSM   has identi- fied a group of disorders—known as the   anxiety disorders —that share obvious symptoms of clinically significant fear or anxi- ety. Anxiety disorders affect approximately 25 to 29 percent of the U.S. population at some point in their lives and are the most common category of disorders for women and the second most common for men (Kessler et al., 1994; Kessler, Berglund, Delmar, et al., 2005). In any 12-month period, about 18 per- cent of the adult population suffers from at least one anxiety disorder (Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2005c). Anxiety disorders create enormous personal, economic, and health care problems for those affected. Some years ago several studies estimated that the anxiety disorders cost the United States somewhere between $42.3 billion and $47 billion in direct and indirect costs (about 30 percent of the nation’s total mental health bill of $148 bil- lion in 1990; Greenberg et al., 1999; Kessler & Greenberg, 2002). The figure is no doubt even higher now. Anxiety dis- orders are also associated with an increased prevalence of a number of medical conditions including asthma, chronic pain, hypertension, arthritis, cardiovascular disease, and irritable bowel syndrome (Roy-Byrne et al., 2008) and people with anxiety disorders are very high users of medical services (e.g., Chavira et al., 2009). In this chapter, we describe a number of different anxiety disorders. We also focus on   obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) .   Obsessions   are persistent and highly recurrent intru- sive thoughts or images that are experienced as disturbing and inappropriate. People affected by such obsessions try to resist or suppress them, or to neutralize them with some other thought or action. Compulsions are repetitive behaviors (such as hand- washing or checking) that the person feels must be performed in response to the obsession. Compulsions are sometimes performed as lengthy rituals. These behaviors have the goal of preventing or reducing distress or preventing some dreaded out- come from occurring. Historically, anxiety and obsessive-compulsive disorders were considered to be classic neurotic disorders. Although individu- als with   neurotic disorders   show maladaptive and self-defeating behaviors, they are not incoherent, dangerous, or out of touch with reality. To Freud, these neurotic disorders developed when intrapsychic conflict produced significant anxiety. Anxiety was, in Freud’s formulation, a sign of an inner battle or conflict between some primitive desire (from the id) and prohibitions against its expression (from the ego and superego). Sometimes this anxiety was overtly expressed (as in those disorders known today as the anxiety disorders). In certain other neurotic disorders, however, he believed that the anxiety might not be obvious, either to the person involved or to others, if psychological defense mechanisms were able to deflect or mask it. The term   neurosis   was dropped from the  DSM   in 1980. In addition, in   DSM-III , some disorders that did not involve obvious anxiety symptoms were reclassified as either dissociative or somatoform disorders (some neurotic disorders were absorbed into the mood disorders category as well—see Chapters 7  6
and 8). This change was made to group together smaller sets of dis- orders that shared more obvious symptoms and features. In   DSM-5  this trend has gone a step further. Obsessive-compulsive disorder is no longer classified as an anxiety disorder. Instead, it is now listed in a new   DSM-5   category called   obsessive-compulsive and related disorders   (see Thinking Critically about   DSM-5 ). We begin by discussing the nature of fear and anxiety as emotional and cognitive states and patterns of responding, each of which has an extremely important adaptive value but to which humans at times seem all too vulnerable. We will then move to a discussion of the anxiety disorders. Finally, we consider OCD and other disorders from the new obsessive-compulsive and related disorders category.  The Fear and Anxiety Response Patterns  There has never been complete agreement about how distinct the two emotions of fear and anxiety are from each other. Histori- cally, the most common way of distinguishing between the fear and anxiety response patterns has been whether there is a clear and obvious source of danger that would be regarded as real by most people. When the source of danger is obvious, the experi- enced emotion has been called fear (e.g., “I’m afraid of snakes”). With anxiety, however, we frequently cannot specify clearly what the danger is (e.g., “I’m anxious about my parents’ health”).  Fear  In recent years, however, many prominent researchers have proposed a more fundamental distinction between the fear and anxiety response patterns (e.g., Barlow, 1988, 2002; Bouton, 2005; Grillon, 2008; McNaughton, 2008). According to these theorists, fear is a basic emotion (shared by many animals) that involves activation of the “fight-or-flight” response of the auto- nomic nervous system. This is an almost instantaneous reaction to any imminent threat such as a dangerous predator or someone pointing a loaded gun. Its adaptive value as a primitive alarm response to imminent danger is that it allows us to escape. When the fear response occurs in the absence of any obvious external danger, we say the person has had a spontaneous or uncued   panic attack . The symptoms of a panic attack are nearly identical to those experi- enced during a state of fear except that panic attacks are often accompanied by a subjective sense of impending doom, includ- ing fears of dying, going crazy, or losing control. These latter cognitive symptoms do not generally occur during fear states. Thus fear and panic have three components: 1. cognitive/subjective   components   (“I   feel   afraid/terrified”; “I’m going to die”) 2. physiological components (such as increased heart rate and heavy breathing) 3. behavioral components (a strong urge to escape or flee; Lang, 1968, 1971)  I n   DSM-5,   obsessive-compulsive disorder was removed from the anxiety disorders category and placed into a new cate- gory called “obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.” (As you already know from Chapter 5, PTSD was also removed and put into a new category called “trauma and stressor-related disorders.”) One reason for moving OCD into the new category was that anxi- ety is not generally used as an indicator of OCD severity. Indeed, for people with certain forms of OCD such as symmetry-related obsessions and compulsions, anxiety is not even a prominent symptom. It was also noted that anxiety occurs in a wide range of disorders, so the presence of some anxiety is not a valid reason to regard OCD an anxiety disorder. Indeed Stein et al. (2010) wrote that “the highly stereotyped, driven, repetitive, and nonfunctional quality of compulsive behaviors differentiate OCD from normal acts and from the types of avoidance that occur in other anxiety disorders” (p. 497). Yet another reason is that the neurobiological underpinnings of OCD appear to be rather different from those of other anxiety disorders, focusing on frontal-striatal neural circuitry including the orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and striatum (especially the caudate nucleus). Studies examining the “OCD- related disorders” such as body dysmorphic disorder (obsessing about perceived or imagined flaws in physical appearance) and trichotillomania (chronic hair pulling) also suggest shared involve- ment of frontal-striatal neural circuitry. Finally, other anxiety disorders respond to a wider range of medication treatments than does OCD, which seems to respond selectively to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. How compelling do these reasons sound to you? What kinds of research findings might further support the grouping of OCD with related disorders such as hoarding or trichotillomania? On the contrary, what research findings might incline you to think that it was wrong to remove OCD from the anxiety disorders category?  THINKING CRITICALLY about DSM-5  Why Is OCD No Longer Considered to Be an Anxiety Disorder?   DSM-5
These components are only “loosely coupled” (Lang, 1985), which means that someone might show, for example, physiologi- cal and behavioral indications of fear or panic without much of the subjective component, or vice versa.  Anxiety  In contrast to fear and panic, the anxiety response pattern is a com- plex blend of unpleasant emotions and cognitions that is both more oriented to the future and much more diffuse than fear (Barlow, 1988, 2002). But like fear, it has not only cognitive/subjective com- ponents but also physiological and behavioral components. At the cognitive/subjective level, anxiety involves negative mood, worry about possible future threats or danger, self-preoccupation, and a sense of being unable to predict the future threat or to control it if it occurs. At a physiological level, anxiety often creates a state of tension and chronic overarousal, which may reflect risk assessment and readiness for dealing with danger should it occur (“Something awful may happen, and I had better be ready for it if it does”). Although there is no activation of the fight-or-flight response as there is with fear, anxiety does prepare or prime a person for the fight-or-flight response should the anticipated danger occur. At a behavioral level, anxiety may create a strong tendency to avoid situations where danger might be encountered, but there is not the immediate behavioral urge to flee with anxiety as there is with fear (Barlow, 1988, 2002). Support for the idea that anxiety is descrip- tively and functionally distinct from fear or panic comes both from complex statistical analyses of subjective reports of panic and anxi- ety and from a great deal of neurobiological evidence (e.g., Bouton, 2005; Bouton et al., 2001; Davis, 2006; Grillon, 2008). The adaptive value of anxiety may be that it helps us plan and prepare for possible threat. In mild to moderate degrees, anxiety actually enhances learning and performance. For exam- ple, a mild amount of anxiety about how you are going to do on your next exam, or in your next tennis match, can actually be helpful. But although anxiety is often adaptive in mild or moderate degrees, it is maladaptive when it becomes chronic and severe, as we see in people diagnosed with anxiety disorders. Although there are many threatening situations that provoke fear or anxiety unconditionally, many of our sources of fear and anxiety are learned. Years of human and nonhuman animal experimentation have established that the basic fear and anxiety response patterns are highly conditionable (e.g., Fanselow & Ponnusamy, 2008; Lipp, 2006). That is, previously neutral and novel stimuli (conditioned stimuli) that are repeat- edly paired with, and reliably predict, frightening or unpleasant events such as various kinds of physical or psychological trauma (unconditioned stimulus) can acquire the capacity to elicit fear or anxiety themselves (conditioned response). Such condition- ing is a completely normal and adaptive process that allows all of us to learn to anticipate upcoming frightening events if they are reliably preceded by a signal. Yet this normal and adaptive pro- cess can also lead in some cases to the development of clinically significant fears and anxieties, as we will see. For example, a girl named Angela sometimes saw and heard her father physically abuse her mother in the evening. After this happened four or five times, Angela started to become anxious as soon as she heard her father’s car arrive in the driveway at the end of the day. In such situations a wide variety of initially neutral stimuli may accidentally come to serve as cues that something threatening and unpleasant is about to happen—and thereby come to elicit fear or anxiety themselves. Our thoughts and images can also serve as conditioned stimuli capable of elic- iting the fear or anxiety response pattern. For example, Angela came to feel anxious even when thinking about her father.  in review  •   Compare and contrast fear or panic with anxiety, making sure to note that both emotions involve three response systems.  •   Explain the significance of the fact that both fear and anxiety can be classically conditioned.  Overview of the Anxiety Disorders and Their Commonalities  Anxiety disorders   all have unrealistic, irrational fears or anxieties of disabling intensity as their principal and most obvious mani- festation. Among the disorders recognized in   DSM-5   are: 1. specific phobia 2. social anxiety disorder (social phobia) 3. panic disorder 4. agoraphobia 5. generalized anxiety disorder As seen in the following brief overview, people with these varied disorders differ from one another both in terms of the relative preponderance of fear or panic versus anxiety symptoms that they experience and in the kinds of objects or situations that most concern them. For example, people with   specific   or   social  Fear or panic is a basic emotion that is shared by many animals, including humans, and may activate the fight-or-flight response of the sympathetic nervous system. This allows us to respond rapidly when faced with a dangerous situation, such as being threatened by a predator. In humans who are having a panic attack, there is no external threat; panic occurs because of some misfiring of this response system.
phobias exhibit many anxiety symptoms about the possibility of encountering their phobic situation, but they may also experi- ence a fear or panic response when they actually encounter the situation. People with   panic disorder   experience both frequent panic attacks and intense anxiety focused on the possibility of having another one. People with   agoraphobia   go to great lengths to avoid a variety of feared situations, ranging from open streets, bridges, and crowded public places. By contrast, people with   gen- eralized anxiety disorder   (like Leni in the case study that opened this chapter) mostly experience a general sense of diffuse anxiety and worry about many potentially bad things that may hap- pen; some may also experience an occasional panic attack, but it is not a focus of their anxiety. It is also important to note that many people with one anxiety disorder will experience at least one more anxiety disorder and/or depression either concurrently or at a different point in their lives (e.g., Brown & Barlow, 2002, 2009; Kessler, Berglund, Demler, et al., 2005). Given these commonalities across the anxiety disorders, it should come as no surprise that there are some important simi- larities in the basic causes of these disorders (as well as many differences). Among biological causal factors, we will see that there are genetic contributions to each of these disorders and that at least part of the genetic vulnerability may be nonspecific, or common across the disorders (e.g., Barlow, 2002; Craske & Waters, 2005). In adults, the common genetic vulnerabil- ity is manifested at a psychological level at least in part by the important personality trait called   neuroticism —a proneness or disposition to experience negative mood states that is a com- mon risk factor for both anxiety and mood disorders (e.g., Klein et al., 2009). The brain structures most centrally involved in most disorders are generally in the limbic system (often known as the “emotional brain”) and certain parts of the cortex, and the neurotransmitter substances that are most centrally involved are gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), norepinephrine, and serotonin (see Chapter 3). Among common psychological causal factors, we will see that classical conditioning of fear, panic, or anxiety to a range of stimuli plays an important role in many of these disorders (Forsyth et al., 2006; Mineka & Oehlberg, 2008; Mineka & Zinbarg, 1996, 2006). In addition, people who have perceptions of a lack of control over either their environments or their own emotions (or both) seem more vulnerable to developing anxiety disorders. The development of such perceptions of uncontrollability depends heavily on the social environment people are raised in, including parenting styles (Chorpita & Barlow, 1998; Craske & Waters, 2005; Mineka & Zinbarg, 2006; Hudson & Rapee, 2009). For certain disorders, faulty or distorted patterns of cognition also may play an important role. Finally, the sociocultural environment in which people are raised also has prominent effects on the kinds of objects and experiences people become anxious about or come to fear. Ultimately what we must strive for is a good biopsychosocial understanding of how all these types of causal factors interact with one another in the development of anxiety disorders. Finally, as we will see, there are many commonalities across the effective treatments for the various anxiety disorders (e.g., Barlow, 2004; Campbell-Sills & Barlow, 2007). For each disorder, graduated exposure to feared cues, objects, and situations—until fear or anxiety begins to habituate—consti- tutes the single most powerful therapeutic ingredient. Further, for certain disorders the addition of cognitive restructuring techniques can provide added benefit. What these cognitive restructuring techniques for different disorders have in com- mon is that they help the individual understand his or her distorted patterns of thinking about anxiety-related situations and how these patterns can be changed. Medications can also be useful in treating all disorders except specific phobias, and nearly all tend to fall into two primary medication catego- ries: antianxiety medications (anxiolytics) and antidepressant medications. We now turn to a more detailed discussion of each disor- der, highlighting their common and their distinct features as well as what is known about their causes. We start with phobic disorders—the most common anxiety disorders. A   phobia   is a persistent and disproportionate fear of some specific object or situation that presents little or no actual danger and yet leads to a great deal of avoidance of these feared situations. As we will see in our discussion of   DSM-5 , there are three main categories of pho- bias: (1) specific phobia, (2) social phobia, and (3) agoraphobia.  in review  •   What is the central feature of all anxiety disorders? That is, what do they have in common?  •   What differentiates the anxiety disorders from one another?  •   What are some common kinds of biological and psychosocial causes of the different anxiety disorders?  •   What is the most important ingredient across effective psychoso- cial treatments for the anxiety disorders?  Specific Phobias  A person is diagnosed as having a   specific phobia   if she or he shows strong and persistent fear that is triggered by the presence of a specific object or situation (see   DSM-5   box for diagnostic criteria). When individuals with specific phobias encounter a phobic stimulus, they often show an immediate fear response that often resembles a panic attack except for the exis- tence of a clear external trigger (APA, 2013). Not surprisingly, such individuals also experience anxiety if they anticipate they may encounter a phobic object or situation and so go to great lengths to avoid encounters with their phobic stimulus. Indeed, they often even avoid seemingly innocent representations of it such as photographs or television images. For example, claus- trophobic persons may go to great lengths to avoid entering a closet or an elevator, even if this means climbing many flights
of stairs or turning down jobs that might require them to take an elevator. Generally, people with specific phobias recognize that their fear is somewhat excessive or unreasonable although occasionally they may not have this insight. This avoidance is a cardinal characteristic of phobias; it occurs both because the phobic response itself is so unpleasant and because of the phobic person’s irrational appraisal of the likelihood that something terrible will happen. Table 6.1 on page 168 lists the five subtypes of specific phobias recognized in   DSM-5 , along with some examples. The following case is typical of specific phobia:  A Pilot’s Wife’s Fear   Mary, a married mother of three, was 47 at the time she first sought treatment for both claustrophobia and acrophobia. She reported having been intensely afraid of enclosed spaces (claustrophobia) and of heights (acrophobia) since her teens. She remembered having been locked in closets by her older siblings when she was a child; the siblings also confined her under blankets to scare her and added to her fright by showing her pictures of spiders after releasing her from under the blankets. She traced the onset of her claustrophobia to those traumatic incidents, but she had no idea why she was afraid of heights. While her children had been growing up, she had been a housewife and had managed to live a fairly normal life in spite of her two specific phobias. However, her children were now grown, and she wanted to find a job outside her home. This was proving to be very difficult because she could not take elevators and was frightened being on anything other than the first floor of an office building. Moreover, her husband had for some years been working for an airline, which entitled him to free airline tickets. The fact that Mary could not fly (due to her phobias) had become a sore point in her marriage because they both wanted to be able to take advantage of these free tickets to see distant places. Thus, although she had had these phobias for many years, they had become truly disabling only in recent years as her life circum- stances had changed and she could no longer easily avoid heights or enclosed spaces.  People with claustrophobia may find elevators so frightening that they go to great lengths to avoid them. If for some reason they have to take an elevator, they will be very frightened and have thoughts about the elevator falling, the doors never opening, or there not being enough air to breathe.  A.   Marked fear or anxiety about a specific object or situation (e.g., flying, heights, animals, receiving an injection, seeing blood).  Note:   In children, the fear or anxiety may be expressed by cry- ing, tantrums, freezing, or clinging.  B.   The phobic object or situation almost always provokes imme- diate fear or anxiety.  C.   The phobic object or situation is actively avoided or endured with intense fear or anxiety.  D.   The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the specific object or situation and to the sociocul- tural context.  E.   The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6 months or more.  F.   The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant dis- tress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  G.   The disturbance is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder, including fear, anxiety, and avoidance of situations associated with panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating symptoms (as in agoraphobia); objects or situa- tions related to obsessions (as in obsessive-compulsive disor- der); reminders of traumatic events (as in posttraumatic stress disorder); separation from home or attachment figures (as in separation anxiety disorder); or social situations (as in social anxiety disorder).  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Specific Phobia   DSM- 5
If people who suffer from phobias attempt to approach their phobic situation, they are overcome with fear or anxiety, which may vary from mild feelings of apprehension and distress (usually while still at some distance) to full-fledged activation of the fight-or-flight response. Regardless of how it begins, phobic behavior tends to be reinforced because every time the person with a phobia avoids a feared situation his or her anxiety decreases. In addition, the secondary benefits derived from being disabled, such as increased attention, sympathy, and some con- trol over the behavior of others, may also sometimes reinforce a phobia. One category of specific phobias that has a number of interesting and unique characteristics is   blood-injection-injury phobia . It probably occurs in about 3 to 4 percent of the popu- lation (Ayala et al., 2009; Öst & Hellström, 1997). People afflicted with this phobia typically experience at least as much (if not more) disgust as fear (Schienle et al., 2005; Teachman & Saporito, 2009). They also show a unique physiological response when confronted with the sight of blood or injury. Rather than showing the simple increase in heart rate and blood pressure seen when most people with phobias encounter their phobic object, these people show an initial acceleration, followed by a dramatic drop in both heart rate and blood pressure. This is very fre- quently accompanied by nausea, dizziness, or fainting, which do not occur with other specific phobias (Öst & Hellström, 1997; Page & Tan, 2009). Interestingly, people with this phobia show this unique physiological response pattern only in the presence of blood and injury stimuli; they exhibit the more typical physiological response pattern characteristic of the fight-or-flight response to their other feared objects (see Dahlloef & Öst, 1998; Öst & Hugdahl, 1985). From an evolutionary and functional stand- point, this unique physiological response pattern may have evolved for a specific purpose: By fainting, the person being attacked might inhibit further attack, and if an attack did occur, the drop in blood pressure would minimize blood loss (Craske, 1999; Marks & Nesse, 1991). This type of phobia appears to be highly heritable (Czajkowski et al., 2011).  Prevalence, Age of Onset, and Gender Differences  Specific phobias are quite common. Results of the National Comorbidity Survey-Replication, which used   DSM-IV   criteria, revealed a lifetime prevalence rate of about 12 percent (Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2005c). Among people with one specific phobia, over 75 percent have at least one other specific fear that is exces- sive (Curtis, Magee, et al., 1998). The relative gender ratios vary considerably according to the type of specific phobia, but phobias are always considerably more common in women than in men. For example, about 90 to 95 percent of people with ani- mal phobias are women, but the gender ratio is less than 2:1 for blood-injection-injury phobia. The average age of onset for dif- ferent types of specific phobias also varies widely. Animal phobias usually begin in childhood, as do blood-injection-injury phobias and dental phobias. However, other phobias such as claustro- phobia and driving phobia tend to begin in adolescence or early adulthood (Barlow, 2002; Öst, 1987).  Psychological Causal Factors  A variety of psychological causal factors have been implicated in the origins of specific phobias, ranging from deep-seated  In blood-injection-injury phobia, the afflicted person experiences disgust and fear at the sight of someone receiving an injection. When confronted with the sight of blood or injury, people with this phobic disorder often experience nausea, dizziness, and fainting.  table   6.1  Subtypes of Specific Phobias in   DSM-5  Phobia Type   Examples  Animal   Snakes, spiders, dogs, insects, birds Natural Environment   Storms, heights, water Blood-Injection-Injury   Seeing blood or an injury, receiving an injection, seeing a person in a wheelchair Situational   Public transportation, tunnels, bridges, elevators, flying, driving, enclosed spaces Other   Choking, vomiting, “space phobia” (fear of falling down if away from walls or other support) Source: Adapted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Text Revision, fifth edition (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association.
psychodynamic conflicts to relatively straightforward traumatic conditioning of fear and a multitude of individual differences in who is at risk for such conditioning.  PSyChOANAlyTiC ViEwPOiNT   According to the psycho- analytic view, phobias represent a defense against anxiety that stems from repressed impulses from the id. Because it is too dangerous to “know” the repressed id impulse, the anxiety is displaced onto some external object or situation that has some symbolic relationship to the real object of the anxiety (Freud, 1909). However, this prototypical psychodynamic account of how phobias are acquired was long criticized as being far too speculative, and an alternative, simpler account from learning theory was first proposed by Wolpe and Rachman (1960), which has now been further refined and expanded as discussed below.  PhOBiAS AS lEArNED BEhAViOr   As an alternative to psychoanalytic accounts, Wolpe and Rachman (1960) devel- oped an account based on learning theory, which sought to explain the development of phobic behavior through classi- cal conditioning. Numerous other theorists in the 1960s and 1970s also agreed that the principles of classical conditioning appeared to account for the acquisition of irrational fears and phobias. The fear response can readily be conditioned to previously neutral stimuli when these stimuli are paired with traumatic or painful events. We would also expect that, once acquired, phobic fears would generalize to other, similar objects or situations. Recall, for example, that Mary’s claus- trophobia had probably been caused by multiple incidents as a child when her siblings locked her in closets and confined her under blankets to scare her. But as an adult, Mary feared elevators and caves as well as other enclosed places. The pow- erful role of classical conditioning in the development of pho- bias was supported in a survey by Öst and Hugdahl (1981), who administered questionnaires to 106 adult phobic clients that concerned, among other things, the purported origins of their fears (see Mineka & Sutton, 2006, for a review). Fifty-eight percent cited traumatic conditioning experiences as the sources of their phobias. Some of these traumatic con- ditioning events were simply uncued panic attacks, which are now known to effectively condition fear (e.g., Acheson et al., 2007; Forsyth & Eifert, 1998).  Vicarious Conditioning   Direct traumatic condition- ing in which a person has a terrifying experience in the pres- ence of a neutral object or situation is not the only way that people can learn irrational, phobic fears. Simply watching a phobic person behaving fearfully with his or her phobic object can be distressing to the observer and can result in fear being transmitted from one person to another through vicarious or observational classical conditioning. In addition, watching a nonfearful person undergoing a frightening experience can also lead to vicarious conditioning. For example, one man, as a boy, had witnessed his grandfather vomit while dying. Shortly after this traumatic event (his grandfather’s distress while dying) the boy had developed a strong and persistent vomiting phobia. Indeed, when this man was in middle age he even contem- plated suicide one time when he was nauseated and feared vomiting (Mineka & Zinbarg, 2006). Related experimental findings have been observed in laboratory analogue studies of human children. For example, two studies showed that 7- to 9-year-old children who saw pictures of an unfamiliar animal (an Australian marsupial) paired 10 times with fearful facial expressions showed increased fear beliefs and behavioral avoid- ance of this conditioned stimulus (CS) relative to children who saw the unfamiliar animal paired with happy facial expressions. These effects persisted for at least one week (Askew & Field, 2007; see Askew & Field, 2008, for a review). Animal research using rhesus monkeys has increased our confidence that vicarious conditioning of intense fears can indeed occur. In these experiments, Mineka and Cook and their colleagues (e.g., Cook & Mineka, 1989; Mineka & Cook, 1993; Mineka, Davidson, et al., 1984) showed that laboratory-reared monkeys who were not initially afraid of snakes rapidly devel- oped a phobic-like fear of snakes simply through observing a wild-reared monkey behaving fearfully with snakes. Significant fear was acquired after only 4 to 8 minutes of exposure to the wild-reared monkey with snakes, and there were no signs that the fear had diminished 3 months later. The monkeys could also learn the fear simply through watching a videotape of the wild-reared model monkey behaving fearfully with snakes. This suggests that the mass media also play a role in the vicarious  Monkeys who watch a model monkey (such as the one illustrated here) behaving fearfully with a live boa constrictor will rapidly acquire an in- tense fear of snakes themselves. Fears can thus be learned vicariously without any direct traumatic experience.
conditioning of fears and phobias in people (Cook & Mineka, 1990; Mineka & Sutton, 2006).  individual Differences in learning   Does the direct and vicarious conditioning model really explain the origins of most phobias? Given all the traumas that people undergo, why don’t more people develop phobias (Mineka & Oehlberg, 2008; Mineka & Zinbarg, 1996, 2006; Rachman, 1990)? The answer seems to be, at least in good part, that differences in life experiences among individuals strongly affect whether or not conditioned fears or phobias actually develop. For example, years of positive experiences with friendly dogs before being bitten by one will probably keep a dog bite victim from developing a full-blown dog phobia. Thus, to understand individual differ- ences in the development and maintenance of phobias, we need to understand the role of the different life experiences of people who undergo the same trauma. Some life experiences may serve as risk factors and make certain people more vulnerable to phobias than others, and other experiences may serve as protective factors for the development of phobias (Mineka & Sutton, 2006). For example, children who have had more previous nontraumatic experiences with a dentist are less likely to develop dental anxiety after a bad and painful experience than are children with fewer previous nontraumatic experiences (Kent, 1997; Ten Berge et al., 2002). This shows the importance of the individual’s prior familiarity with an object or situation in determining whether a phobia develops following a fear-conditioning experience. Moreover, Mineka and Cook (1986) showed that monkeys who first simply watched nonfearful mon- keys behaving nonfearfully with snakes were immunized against acquiring a fear of snakes when they later saw fearful monkeys behaving fearfully with snakes. By analogy, if a child has extensive exposure to a nonfearful parent behaving nonfearfully with the phobic object (e.g., spiders) or situation (e.g., heights) of the other, phobic parent, this may serve as a protective factor and immu- nize the child against the effects of later seeing the phobic parent behaving fearfully with the phobic object (Mineka & Oehlberg, 2008; Mineka & Sutton, 2006). Egliston and Rapee (2007) reported related results in an analogue study of human toddlers who either watched their mothers reacting positively to a snake or spider, or watched the snake or spider alone. Subsequently both groups of toddlers watched an experimenter reacting with fear and disgust toward the stimulus. Those in the group who had first watched their mother behaving positively acquired less fear than those who had first watched the stimulus alone. Events that occur during a conditioning experience, as well as before it, are also important in determining the level of fear that is conditioned. For example, experiencing an inescapable and uncontrollable event, such as being attacked by a dog that one cannot escape from after being bitten, is expected to condi- tion fear much more powerfully than experiencing the same intensity of trauma that is escapable or to some extent control- lable (e.g., by running away after the attack; Mineka, 1985a; Mineka & Zinbarg, 1996, 2006). In addition, the experiences that a person has after a conditioning experience may effect the strength and maintenance of the conditioned fear (Rescorla, 1974; White & Davey, 1989). For example, the   inflation effect  suggests that a person who acquired, a mild fear of driving fol- lowing a minor crash might be expected to develop a full-blown phobia if he or she later were physically assaulted, even though no automobile was present during the assault (Dadds et al., 2001; Mineka, 1985b; Mineka & Zinbarg, 1996, 2006). Even verbal information that later alters one’s interpretation of the dangerousness of a previous trauma can inflate the level of fear (e.g., being told, “You’re lucky to be alive because the man who crashed into your car last week had lost his license due to a record of drunk driving leading to fatal car crashes”; Dadds et al., 2001). Another way in which fear of a CS can be inflated following conditioning is if the organism later is exposed to uncontrollable stress (Baratta et al., 2007). These examples show that the factors involved in the origins and maintenance of fears and phobias are more complex than suggested by the traditional, simplistic conditioning view, although they are nevertheless consistent with contemporary views of conditioning (Mineka & Oehlberg, 2008; see also Coelho & Purkis, 2009; Laborda & Miller, 2011). It has also been shown that our cognitions, or thoughts, can help maintain our phobias once they have been acquired. For example, people with phobias are constantly on the alert for their phobic objects or situations and for other stimuli rel- evant to their phobia (McNally & Reese, 2009). Nonphobic persons, by contrast, tend to direct their attention away from threatening stimuli (see Mineka, Rafaeli, & Yovel, 2003). In addition, phobics also markedly overestimate the prob- ability that feared objects have been, or will be, followed by frightening events. This cognitive bias may help maintain or strengthen phobic fears with the passage of time (Muhlberger et al., 2006; Öhman & Mineka, 2001; Tomarken, Mineka, & Cook, 1989).  A person who has had good experiences with a potentially phobic stimulus, such as the little girl playing here with her dog, is likely to be immunized from later acquiring a fear of dogs even if she has a traumatic encounter with one.
Evolutionary Preparedness for learning Certain Fears and Phobias   Consider the observation that people are much more likely to have phobias of snakes, water, heights, and enclosed spaces than of motorcycles and guns, even though the latter objects may be at least as likely to be associated with trauma. This is because our evolutionary his- tory has affected which stimuli we are most likely to come to fear. Primates and humans seem to be evolutionarily prepared to rapidly associate certain objects—such as snakes, spiders, water, and enclosed spaces—with frightening or unpleas- ant events (e.g., Mineka & Öhman, 2002; Öhman, 1996; Seligman, 1971). This   prepared learning   occurs because, over the course of evolution, those primates and humans who rapidly acquired fears of certain objects or situations that posed real threats to our early ancestors may have enjoyed a selective advantage. Thus “prepared” fears are not inborn or innate but rather are easily acquired or especially resistant to extinction. Guns and motorcycles, by contrast, were not pres- ent in our early evolutionary history and so did not convey any such selective advantage. There is now a large amount of experimental evidence sup- porting the preparedness theory of phobias. In one important series of experiments using human subjects, Öhman and his col- leagues (see Öhman, 1996; Öhman, 2009; Öhman & Mineka, 2001, for reviews) found that fear is conditioned more effectively to fear-relevant stimuli (slides of snakes and spiders) than to fear-irrelevant stimuli (slides of flowers and mushrooms). These researchers also found that once the individuals acquired the conditioned responses to fear-relevant stimuli, these responses (including activation of the relevant brain area, the amygdala) could be elicited even when the fear-relevant stimuli (but not the fear-irrelevant stimuli) were presented subliminally (i.e., presentation was so brief that the stimuli were not consciously perceived; e.g., Carlsson et al., 2004; Öhman et al., 2007). This subliminal activation of responses to phobic stimuli may help to account for certain aspects of the irrationality of phobias. That is, people with phobias may not be able to control their fear because the fear may arise from cognitive structures that are not under conscious control (Öhman & Mineka, 2001; Öhman & Soares, 1993). Another series of experiments showed that lab-reared mon- keys in a vicarious conditioning paradigm can easily acquire fears of fear-relevant stimuli such as toy snakes and toy croco- diles but not of fear-irrelevant stimuli such as flowers and a toy rabbit (Cook & Mineka, 1989, 1990). Thus, both monkeys and humans seem selectively to associate certain fear-relevant stimuli with threat or danger. Moreover, these lab-reared monkeys had had no prior exposure to any of the stimuli involved (e.g., snakes or flowers) before participating in these experiments. Thus, the monkey results support the evolutionarily based preparedness hypothesis even more strongly than the human experiments. For example, human subjects (unlike the lab- reared monkeys) might show superior conditioning to snakes or spiders because of preexisting negative associations to snakes or spiders rather than because of evolutionary factors (Mineka & Öhman, 2002).  Biological Causal Factors  Genetic and temperamental variables affect the speed and strength of conditioning of fear (e.g., Gray, 1987; Hettema et al., 2003; Oehlberg & Mineka, 2011). That is, depending on their genetic makeup or their temperament and personality (all of which are clearly related; see Chapter 3), people are more or less likely to acquire fears and phobias. For example, Lonsdorf and colleagues (2009) found that individuals who are carriers of one of the two variants on the serotonin-transporter gene (the   s   allele, which has been linked to heightened neuroticism) show superior fear conditioning relative to individuals who do not carry the   s   allele. However, those with one of two variants of a different gene (the COMT met/met genotype) did not show superior conditioning but did show enhanced resistance to extinction (see also Lonsdorf & Kalisch, 2011). Relatedly, Kagan and his colleagues (2001) found that   behaviorally inhib- ited   toddlers (who are excessively timid, shy, easily distressed, etc.) at 21 months of age were at higher risk of developing multiple specific phobias by 7 to 8 years of age than were unin- hibited children (32 versus 5 percent). The average number of reported fears in the inhibited group was three to four per child (Biederman et al., 1990). Several behavior genetic studies also suggest a modest genetic contribution to the development of specific phobias. For example, a large female twin study found that monozygotic (identical) twins were more likely to share animal phobias and situational phobias (such as of heights or water) than were dizy- gotic (nonidentical) twins (Kendler et al., 1999b). Very similar results were later also found for men (Hettema et al., 2005). However, the same studies also found evidence that nonshared environmental factors (i.e., individual specific experiences not shared by twins) also played a very substantial role in the origins of specific phobias, a result that supports the idea that phobias are learned behaviors. Another study found that the heritability of animal phobias was separate from the heritability of complex phobias such as social phobia and agoraphobia (Czajkowski et al., 2011).  Treatments  A form of behavior therapy called   exposure therapy —which is the best treatment for specific phobias—involves controlled exposure to the stimuli or situations that elicit phobic fear (Choy et al., 2007; Craske & Mystkowski, 2006). Clients are gradually placed—symbolically or increasingly under “real-life” conditions—in those situations they find most frightening. In treatment, clients are encouraged to expose themselves (either alone or with the aid of a therapist or friend) to their feared
situations for long enough periods of time so that their fear begins to subside. One variant on this procedure, known as   participant modeling,   is often more effective than exposure alone. Here the therapist calmly models ways of interacting with the phobic stim- ulus or situation (Bandura, 1977, 1997). These techniques enable clients to learn that these situations are not as frightening as they had thought and that their anxiety, while unpleasant, is not harm- ful and will gradually dissipate (Craske & Mystkowski, 2006; Craske & Rowe, 1997). The new learning is probably mediated by changes in brain activation in the amygdala, which is centrally involved in the emotion of fear. For certain phobias such as small-animal phobias, flying phobia, claustrophobia, and blood-injury phobia, exposure ther- apy is often highly effective when administered in a single long session (of up to 3 hours) (Öst, 1997; Öst et al., 2001). This can be an advantage because some people are more likely to seek treatment if they have to go only once. This treatment has also been shown to be highly effective in youth with specific phobias (e.g., Ollendick et al., 2009). An example of the use of exposure therapy comes from the treatment of Mary, the housewife whose acrophobia and claus- trophobia we described earlier.  Mary’s Treatment   Treatment consisted of 13 sessions of graduated exposure exercises in which the therapist accompa- nied Mary first into mildly fear-provoking situations and then gradually into more and more fear-provoking situations. Mary also engaged in homework, doing these exposure exercises by herself. The prolonged in vivo (“real-life”) exposure sessions lasted as long as necessary for her anxiety to subside. Initial ses- sions focused on Mary’s claustrophobia and on getting her to be able to ride for a few floors in an elevator, first with the therapist and then alone. Later she took longer elevator rides in taller buildings. Exposure for the acrophobia consisted of walking around the periphery of the inner atrium on the top floor of a tall hotel and, later, spending time at a mountain vista overlook spot. The top of the claustrophobia hierarchy consisted of taking a tour of an underground cave. After 13 sessions, Mary successfully took a flight with her husband to Europe and climbed to the top of many tall tourist attractions there.  Recently, some therapists have begun to use virtual reality environments to simulate certain kinds of phobic situations,  One variation on exposure therapy is called participant modeling. Here the therapist models how to touch and pick up a live tarantula and encourages the spider-phobic client to imitate her behavior. This treatment is graduated, with the client’s first task being simply to touch the tarantula from the outside of the cage, then to touch the tarantula with a stick, then with a gloved hand, then with a bare hand, and finally to let the tarantula crawl over his hand. This is a highly effective treatment, with the most spider-phobic clients being able to reach the top of the hierarchy within 60 to 90 minutes.
such as heights and airplanes, as places to conduct exposure treatment. If such techniques were highly effective and widely available, there would be no need to conduct treatment in real situations (such as real airplanes or tall buildings). About a dozen controlled studies have yielded very promising results. Moreover, although the results are not yet entirely conclusive, it appears that the relative efficacy of virtual reality versus live exposure is comparable (e.g., Choy et al., 2007; Parsons & Rizzo, 2008; Rothbaum et al., 2006). Some researchers have also tried combining cognitive restruc- turing techniques or medications with exposure-based techniques to see if this can produce additional gains. In general, studies using cognitive techniques alone have not produced results as good as those using exposure-based techniques, and the addition of cognitive techniques has generally not added much (Craske & Mystkowski, 2006; Wolitzky-Taylor et al., 2008). Similarly, medication treatments are ineffective by themselves, and there is even some evidence that antianxiety medications may interfere with the beneficial effects of exposure therapy (Antony & Barlow, 2002; Choy et al., 2007). Recently, however, some studies have shown that a drug called   d-cycloserine , which is known to facilitate extinction of conditioned fear in animals (e.g., Davis et al., 2005; Davis et al., 2006), may enhance the effectiveness of small amounts of exposure therapy for fear of heights in a virtual reality environment (Ressler et al., 2004; Norberg et al., 2008). D-cyloserine by itself, however, has no effect. These results are very promising, but much more work is necessary before it will be known how useful this drug will be in enhancing the effects of exposure therapy for many different kinds of phobias.  in review  •   What are the five subtypes of specific phobias?  •   Describe the original classical conditioning explanation for the origins of specific phobias as well as how vicarious conditioning may be involved.  •   Explain several sources of individual differences in learning that have improved and expanded the basic conditioning hypothesis of phobia acquisition.  •   Explain how evolutionary factors have influenced which objects and situations we are most likely to learn to fear.  •   Describe the most effective treatment for specific phobias.  Social Phobias  Social phobia   (or social anxiety disorder), as the   DSM-5  describes it, is characterized by disabling fears of one or more specific social situations (such as public speaking, urinating in a public bathroom, or eating or writing in public; see the   DSM-5  box). In these situations, a person fears that she or he may be exposed to the scrutiny and potential negative evaluation of oth- ers or that she or he may act in an embarrassing or humiliating manner. Because of their fears, people with social phobias either avoid these situations or endure them with great distress. Intense fear of public speaking is the single most common type of social phobia.   DSM-5   also identifies two subtypes of social phobia, one of which centers on performance situations such as public speak- ing and one of which is more general and includes nonperfor- mance situations (such as eating in public). Indeed, people with the more general subtype of social phobia often have significant fears of most social situations (rather than simply a few) and often also have a diagnosis of avoid- ant personality disorder (see  0; e.g., Skodol et al., 1995; Stein & Stein, 2008).  Watch   the   Video   Steve: Social Phobia   on   MyPsychLab  Prevalence, Age of Onset, and Gender Differences  The diagnosis of social phobia is very common and occurs even in famous performers such as Barbra Streisand and Carly Simon. The National Comorbidity Survey-Replication estimated that about 12 percent of the population will qualify for a diagnosis of social phobia at some point in their lives (Kessler, Berglund, Demler, et al., 2005; Ruscio et al., 2008). This disorder is somewhat more common among women than men (about 60 percent of sufferers are women). Unlike specific phobias, which most often originate in child- hood, social phobias typically begin somewhat later, during early or middle adolescence or certainly by early adulthood (Bruce et al., 2005; Ruscio et al., 2008). Nearly two-thirds of people with social phobia suffer from one or more additional anxiety disorders at some point in their lives, and about 50 percent also suffer from a depressive disor- der at the same time (Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2005; Ruscio et al., 2008). Approximately one-third abuse alcohol to reduce their anxiety and help them face the  New treatments using virtual reality environments allow therapists to simulate certain kinds of phobic situations, such as standing at heights or sitting in airplanes, in a contrived setting.
situations they fear (for example, drinking before going to a party; Magee et al., 1996). Moreover, because of their distress and avoidance of social situations, people with social phobia, on average, have lower employment rates and lower socioeco- nomic status, and approximately one-third have severe impair- ment in one or more domains of their life (Harvey et al., 2005; Ruscio et al., 2008). Finally, the disorder is remarkably per- sistent, with one study finding that only 37 percent recovered spontaneously over a 12-year period (Bruce et al., 2005). The case of Paul is typical of social phobia (except that not all people with social phobia have full-blown panic attacks, as Paul did, in their socially phobic situations).  A Surgeon’s Social Phobia   Paul was a single white male in his mid-30s when he first presented for treatment. He was a surgeon who reported a 13-year history of social phobia. He had very few social outlets because of his persistent concerns that people would notice how nervous he was in social situations, and he had not dated in many years. Convinced that people would perceive him as foolish or crazy, he particularly worried that people would notice how his jaw tensed up when around other people. Paul frequently chewed gum in public situations, believing that this kept his face from looking distorted. Notably, he had no particular problems talking with people in professional situations. For example, he was quite calm talking with patients before and after surgery. During surgery, when his face was cov- ered with a mask, he also had no trouble carrying out surgical tasks or interacting with the other surgeons and nurses in the room. The trouble began when he left the operating room and had to make small talk—and eye contact—with the other doctors and nurses or with the patient’s family. He frequently had panic attacks in these social situations. During the panic attacks he experienced heart palpitations, fears of “going crazy,” and a sense of his mind “shutting down.” Because the panic attacks occurred only in social situations, he was diagnosed as having social phobia rather than panic disorder. Paul’s social phobia and panic had begun about 13 years earlier when he was under a great deal of stress. His family’s business had failed, his parents had divorced, and his mother had had a heart attack. It was in this context of multiple stress- ors that a personally traumatic incident probably triggered the onset of his social phobia. One day he had come home from medical school to find his best friend in bed with his fiancée. About a month later he had his first panic attack and started avoiding social situations.  Psychological Causal Factors  Social phobias generally involve learned behaviors that have been shaped by evolutionary factors. Such learning is most likely to occur in people who are genetically or temperamentally at risk.  SOCiAl PhOBiAS AS lEArNED BEhAViOr   Like specific phobias, social phobias often seem to originate from simple in- stances of direct or vicarious classical conditioning such as expe- riencing or witnessing a perceived social defeat or humiliation, or being or witnessing the target of anger or criticism (Harvey et al., 2005; Mineka & Zinbarg, 1995, 2006; Tillfors, 2004). In two studies, 56 to 58 percent of people with social phobia recalled and identified direct traumatic experiences as hav- ing been involved in the origin of their social phobias (Öst & Hugdahl, 1981; Townsley et al., 1995). Another study reported that 92 percent of an adult sample of people with social phobia reported a history of severe teasing in childhood, compared to only 35 percent in a group of people with obsessive-compulsive disorder (McCabe et al., 2003). Moreover, a recent laboratory study of people with social phobia revealed that they showed especially robust conditioning of fear when the unconditioned stimulus was socially relevant (critical facial expressions and verbal insults) as opposed to more nonspecifically negative stimuli (such as unpleasant odors and painful pressure) (Lissek et al., 2008). Öst and Hugdahl (1981) reported that another 13 percent of their subjects recalled vicarious conditioning experiences of some sort. One study interviewed a group of people with social phobia about their images of themselves in socially phobic situ- ations and asked where those images had originated (Hackmann et al., 2000). Ninety-six percent of these people remembered some socially traumatic experience that was linked to their own current image of themselves in socially phobic situations. The themes of these memories included having been “criticized for having an anxiety symptom” (e.g., being red or blushing), and having felt “self-conscious and uncomfortable in public as a con- sequence of past criticism” such as “having previously been bul- lied and called a ‘nothing’” (Hackmann et al., 2000, p. 606). People with generalized social phobia also may be especially likely to have grown up with parents who were emotionally cold, socially isolated, and avoidant. Not surprisingly, such parents  Intense fear of public speaking is the single most common social phobia.
devalued sociability and did not encourage their children to go to social events. All these factors thus provided ample opportu- nity for vicarious learning of social fears (Harvey et al., 2005; Morris, 2001; Rapee & Melville, 1997). Harvey and colleagues (2005) also found that many people with social phobia reported that the onset of their social phobia had occurred during a time when they were having problems with their peers such as not fit- ting in. Nevertheless, as with specific phobias, it is important to recognize that not everyone who experiences direct or vicarious conditioning in social situations, or who grows up with socially avoidant parents, or who has problems with peers, develops social phobia. This is because individual differences in experi- ences play an important role in who develops social phobia, as is the case with specific phobias.  SOCiAl FEArS AND PhOBiAS iN AN EVOluTiONAry CONTExT   Social fears and phobias by definition involve fears of members of one’s own species. By contrast, animal fears and phobias usually involve fear of potential predators. Although animal fears probably evolved to trigger activation of the fight- or-flight response to potential predators, Öhman and colleagues proposed that social fears and phobias evolved as a byproduct of dominance hierarchies that are a common social arrangement among animals such as primates (Dimberg & Öhman, 1996; Öhman et al., 1985). Dominance hierarchies are established through aggressive encounters between members of a social group, and a defeated individual typically displays fear and sub- missive behavior but only rarely attempts to escape the situation completely. Thus, these investigators argued, it is not surprising that people with social phobia endure being in their feared situ- ations rather than running away and escaping them, as people with animal phobias often do (see also Longin et al., 2010; Öhman, 2009). If social phobias evolved as a byproduct of dominance hierarchies, it is not surprising that humans have an evolution- arily based predisposition to acquire fears of social stimuli that signal dominance and aggression from other humans. These social stimuli include facial expressions of anger or contempt, which on average all humans seem to process more quickly and readily than happy or neutral facial expressions (Öhman et al., 2001; Öhman, 2009; Schupp et al., 2004). In a series of experi- ments that paralleled ones for specific phobias, Öhman and colleagues demonstrated that subjects develop stronger condi- tioned responses when slides of angry faces are paired with mild electric shocks than when happy or neutral faces are paired with the same shocks (Dimberg & Öhman, 1996). Indeed, even very brief subliminal (not consciously perceived) presentations of the angry face that had been paired with shock were sufficient to activate the conditioned responses (e.g., Parra et al., 1997), probably because even these subliminal angry faces activate  A.   Marked fear or anxiety about one or more social situations in which the individual is exposed to possible scrutiny by others. Examples include social interactions (e.g., having a conversa- tion, meeting unfamiliar people), being observed (e.g., eating or drinking), and performing in front of others (e.g., giving a speech).  Note:   In children, the anxiety must occur in peer settings and not just during interactions with adults.  B.   The individual fears that he or she will act in a way or show anxiety symptoms that will be negatively evaluated (i.e., will be humiliating or embarrassing; will lead to rejection or offend others).  C.   The social situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety.  Note:   In children, the fear or anxiety may be expressed by cry- ing, tantrums, freezing, clinging, shrinking, or failing to speak in social situations.  D.   The social situations are avoided or endured with intense fear or anxiety.  E.   The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual threat posed by the social situation and to the sociocultural context.  F.   The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6 months or more.  G.   The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant dis- tress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  h.   The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not attributable to the physi- ological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medi- cation) or another medical condition.  i.   The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder, such as panic dis- order, body dysmorphic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder.  J.   If another medical condition (e.g., Parkinson’s disease, obesity, disfigurement from burns or injury) is present, the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is clearly unrelated or is excessive. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Social Anxiety Disorder (Social Phobia)   DSM- 5
the amygdala—the central structure involved in fear learning (Öhman et al., 2007). Relatedly, recent results have also shown that people who have social phobia show greater activation of the amygdala (and other brain areas involved in emotion pro- cessing) in response to negative facial expressions (such as angry faces) than do normal controls (Goldin et al., 2009; Phan et al., 2006). Such results may help explain the seemingly irrational quality of social phobia, in that the angry faces are processed very quickly and an emotional reaction can be activated without a person’s awareness of any threat. The hyperactivity to negative facial expressions is paralleled by heightened neural responses to criticism (Blair et al., 2008; see Shin & Liberzon, 2009, for a review).  PErCEPTiONS OF uNCONTrOllABiliTy AND uNPrEDiCTABiliTy   Being exposed to uncontrollable and unpredictable stressful events (such as parental separation and divorce, family conflict, or sexual abuse) may play an important role in the development of social phobia (Mathew et al., 2001; Mineka & Zinbarg, 1995, 2006; Rapee & Spence, 2004). In the case of Paul, the precipitating event seemed to be finding his fiancée in bed with his best friend. Perceptions of uncontrollabil- ity and unpredictability often lead to submissive and unassertive behavior, which is characteristic of socially anxious or phobic people. This kind of behavior is especially likely if the percep- tions of uncontrollability stem from an actual social defeat, which is known in animals to lead to both increased submissive behavior and increased fear (Mineka & Zinbarg, 1995, 2006). Consistent with this, people with social phobia have a dimin- ished sense of personal control over events in their lives (Leung & Heimberg, 1996). This diminished expectation of personal control may develop, at least in part, as a function of having been raised in families with somewhat overprotective (and sometimes rejecting) parents (Lieb et al., 2000).  COGNiTiVE BiASES   Cognitive factors also play a role in the onset and maintenance of social phobia. Beck and Emery (1985) suggested that people with social phobia tend to expect that other people will reject or negatively evaluate them. They argued that this leads to a sense of vulnerability when they are around people who might pose a threat. Clark and Wells (1995; Wells & Clark, 1997) later further proposed that these danger schemas of socially anxious people lead them to expect that they will behave in an awkward and unacceptable fashion, resulting in rejection and loss of status. Such negative expectations lead to their being preoccupied with bodily responses and with stereotyped, nega- tive self-images in social situations; to their overestimating how easily others will detect their anxiety; and to their misunderstand- ing how well they come across to others (Hirsch et al., 2004). Such intense self-preoccupation during social situations, even to the point of attending to their own heart rate, interferes with their ability to interact skillfully (Hirsch et al., 2003; Pineles & Mineka, 2005). A vicious cycle may evolve: Social phobics’ inward attention and somewhat awkward behavior may lead oth- ers to react to them in a less friendly fashion, confirming their expectations (D. M. Clark, 1997; Clark & McManus, 2002). Another cognitive bias seen in social phobia is a tendency to interpret ambiguous social information in a negative rather than a benign manner (e.g., when someone smiles at you, does it mean they like you or that they think you’re foolish?). Moreover, it is the negatively biased interpretations that socially anxious people make that are what is remembered (Hertel et al., 2008). It has also been suggested that these biased cognitive processes combine to maintain social phobia and possibly even contribute to its development (Hirsch, Clark, & Mathews, 2006).  Biological Causal Factors GENETiC AND TEmPErAmENTAl FACTOrS   The most important temperamental variable is   behavioral inhibition , which shares characteristics with both neuroticism and introversion (Bienvenu et al., 2007). Behaviorally inhibited infants who are easily distressed by unfamiliar stimuli and who are shy and avoid- ant are more likely to become fearful during childhood and, by adolescence, to show increased risk of developing social phobia (Hayward et al., 1998; Kagan, 1997). For example, one classic study was conducted on behavioral inhibition as a risk factor in a large group of children, most of whom were already known to be at risk for anxiety because their parents had an emotional disorder. Among these children, those who had been assessed as being high on behavioral inhibition between 2 and 6 years of age were nearly three times more likely to be diagnosed with social phobia (22 per- cent) even in middle childhood (average age of 10) than were children who were low on behavioral inhibition at 2 to 6 years (8 percent; Hirshfeld-Becker et al., 2007; see also Hayward et al., 1998). In another study, 60 children were assessed yearly for be- havioral inhibition from grades 1 to 9. If they showed chronically  Infants and young children who are fearful and easily distressed by novel people or situations are sometimes high on the temperamental variable called behavioral inhibition. Such infants show an increased risk of devel- oping social phobia in adolescence.
high levels of behavioral inhibition throughout this time period, 50 percent had developed social anxiety disorder by grade 9. By contrast, none had developed social anxiety disorder in the group with chronic low behavioral inhibition (Essex et al., 2010). Results from several studies of twins have also shown that there is a modest genetic contribution to social phobia; estimates are that about 30 percent of the variance in liability to social phobia is due to genetic factors (Hettema et al., 2005; Smoller et al., 2008). Nevertheless, these studies suggest that an even larger proportion of variance in who develops social phobia is due to nonshared environ- mental factors, which is consistent with a strong role for learning.  Treatments COGNiTiVE AND BEhAViOrAl ThErAPiES   There are very effective forms of behavior therapy and cognitive-behavior therapy for social phobia. As for specific phobias, behavioral treatments were developed first and generally involve prolonged and gradu- ated exposure to social situations that evoke fear. More recently, as research has revealed the underlying distorted cognitions that characterize social phobia,   cognitive restructuring   techniques have been added to the behavioral techniques, generating a form of cognitive-behavioral therapy (Barlow et al., 2007). In cognitive restructuring the therapist attempts to help clients with social pho- bia identify their underlying negative, automatic thoughts (“I’ve got nothing interesting to say” or “No one is interested in me”). After helping clients understand that such automatic thoughts (which usually occur just below the surface of awareness but can be accessed) often involve cognitive distortions, the therapist helps the clients change these inner thoughts and beliefs through logical reanalysis. The process of logical reanalysis might involve ask- ing oneself questions to challenge the automatic thoughts: “Do I know for certain that I won’t have anything to say?” “Does being nervous have to lead to or equal looking stupid?” In one highly effective version of such treatments, clients may be assigned exercises in which they manipulate their focus of attention (internally versus externally) to demonstrate to them- selves the adverse effects of internal self-focus. They may also receive videotaped feedback to help them modify their distorted self-images. Such techniques have now been very successfully applied to the treatment of social phobia (Clark, Ehlers, et al., 2003, 2006; Heimberg, 2002; Mörtberg et al., 2007). Many studies over the years have shown that exposure therapy and cognitive-behavioral therapy produce comparable results. How- ever, one study suggests that this new, very effective variant on cognitive treatment may be more effective than exposure therapy (Clark et al., 2006). Moreover, at least one study has now shown that simply training individuals with social phobia to disengage from negative social cues during a 15-minute lab task that is repeated 8 times over 4 to 6 weeks produced such remarkable reductions in social anxiety symptoms that nearly 3 out of 4 of the participants no longer met criteria for social anxiety disorder (Schmidt et al., 2009). An example of successful combined treatment can be seen in the case of Paul, the surgeon described earlier who had social phobia.  Paul’s Treatment   Since the onset of his social phobia 13 years earlier, Paul had taken an antidepressant at one point. The drug had helped stop his panic attacks, but he continued to fear them intensely and still avoided social situations. Thus, there was little effect on his social phobia. He had also been in support- ive psychotherapy, which had helped his depression at the time but not his social phobia or his panic. When he went for treat- ment at an anxiety clinic, he was not on any medication or in any other form of treatment. Treatment consisted of 14 weeks of cognitive-behavioral therapy. By the end of treatment, Paul was not panicking at all and was quite comfortable in most social situ- ations that he had previously avoided. He was seeing old friends whom he had avoided for years because of his anxiety, and he was beginning to date. Indeed, he even asked his female thera- pist for a date during the last treatment session! Although such a request was clearly inappropriate, it did indicate how much prog- ress he had made.  mEDiCATiONS   Unlike specific phobias, social phobias can also sometimes be treated with medications. The most effective and widely used medications are several categories of antidepres- sants (including the monoamine oxidase inhibitors [MAOIs] and the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SSRIs] discussed extensively in Chapters 7 and 16; Ipser et al., 2008; Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2007). In some studies, the effects of these antide- pressant medications have been comparable to those seen with cognitive-behavioral treatments. However, in several studies, the newer version of cognitive-behavior therapy discussed earlier produced much more substantial improvement than did medica- tion (e.g., Clark, Ehlers, et al., 2003). Moreover, the medications must be taken over a long period of time to help ensure that re- lapse does not occur (Blanco et al., 2002; Stein & Stein, 2008). A distinct advantage of behavioral and cognitive-behavioral ther- apies over medications, then, is that they generally produce more long-lasting improvement with very low relapse rates; indeed, clients often continue to improve after treatment is over. Finally, several studies have also suggested that when d-cycloserine (dis- cussed with treatment of specific phobias) is added to exposure therapy, the treatment gains occur more quickly and are more substantial (e.g., Guastella et al., 2008).  in review  •   What are the primary diagnostic criteria for social phobia and its two subtypes?  •   Identify three of the psychological causal factors for social pho- bia and two of the biological causal factors.  •   Describe the major treatment approaches used for social phobias.
A.   Recurrent unexpected panic attacks. A panic attack is an abrupt surge of intense fear or intense discomfort that reaches a peak within minutes, and during which time four (or more) of the following symptoms occur:  Note:   The abrupt surge can occur from a calm state or an anxious state.  1.   Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate.  2.   Sweating.  3.   Trembling or shaking.  4.   Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering.  5.   Feelings of choking.  6.   Chest pain or discomfort.  7.   Nausea or abdominal distress.  8.   Feeling dizzy, unsteady, light-headed, or faint.  9.   Chills or heat sensations.  10.   Paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations).  11.   Derealization (feelings of unreality) or depersonalization (being detached from oneself).  12.   Fear of losing control or “going crazy.”  13.   Fear of dying.  Note:   Culture-specific symptoms (e.g., tinnitus, neck soreness, headache, uncontrollable screaming or crying) may be seen. Such symptoms should not count as one of the four required symptoms.  B.   At least one of the attacks has been followed by 1 month (or more) of one or both of the following:  1.   Persistent concern or worry about additional panic attacks or their consequences (e.g., losing control, hav- ing a heart attack, “going crazy”).  2.   A significant maladaptive change in behavior related to the attacks (e.g., behaviors designed to avoid having panic attacks, such as avoidance of exercise or unfamiliar situations).  C.   The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism, cardiopulmonary disorders).  D.   The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., the panic attacks do not occur only in response to feared social situations, as in social anxiety disorder; in response to circumscribed phobic objects or situations, as in specific phobia; in response to obsessions, as in obsessive-com- pulsive disorder; in response to reminders of traumatic events, as in posttraumatic stress disorder; or in response to separation from attachment figures, as in separation anxiety disorder).  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Panic Disorder   DSM- 5  Panic Disorder  Diagnostically,   panic disorder   is defined and characterized by the occurrence of panic attacks that often seem to come “out of the blue.” According to the   DSM-5   criteria for panic disorder, the person must have experienced recurrent, unexpected attacks and must have been persistently concerned about having another attack or worried about the consequences of having an attack for at least a month (often referred to as anticipatory anxiety). For such an event to qualify as a full-blown panic attack, there must be abrupt onset of at least 4 of 13 symptoms, most of which are physical, although three are cognitive: (1) depersonalization (a feeling of being detached from one’s body) or derealization (a feeling that the external world is strange or unreal); (2) fear of dying; or (3) fear of “going crazy” or “losing control” (see the   DSM-5   box for diagnostic criteria). Panic attacks are fairly brief but intense, with symptoms developing abruptly and usually reaching peak intensity within 10 minutes; the attacks usually subside in 20 to 30 minutes and rarely last more than an hour. Periods of anxiety, by contrast, do not usually have such an abrupt onset and are more long lasting. Panic attacks are often “unexpected” or “uncued” in the sense that they do not appear to be provoked by identifiable aspects of the immediate situation. Indeed, they sometimes occur in situations in which they might be least expected, such as dur- ing relaxation or during sleep (known as   nocturnal panic ). In other cases, however, panic attacks are said to be situationally pre- disposed, occurring only sometimes while the person is in a par- ticular situation such as while driving a car or being in a crowd. Because most symptoms of a panic attack are physical, it is not surprising that as many as 85 percent of people having a panic attack may show up repeatedly at emergency rooms or physicians’ offices for what they are convinced is a medical problem—usually cardiac, respiratory, or neurological (White & Barlow, 2002; see also Korczak et al., 2007). Of course, medi- cal causes have to be ruled out. However, if a person experiences panic attacks and becomes very concerned about having addi- tional attacks or worries about the possible consequences of the attack (e.g., having a heart attack or going crazy), a diagnosis of panic disorder will eventually be given. Unfortunately, a correct diagnosis is often not made for years due to the normal results on numerous costly medical tests. Fur- ther complications arise because cardiac patients are at a nearly twofold elevated risk for developing panic disorder (Korczak et al., 2007). Prompt diagnosis and treatment is also important because panic disorder causes approximately as much impairment in social and occupational functioning as that caused by major depressive disorder (Roy-Byrne et al., 2008) and because panic disorder can contribute to the development or worsening of a variety of medi- cal problems (White & Barlow, 2002).
The case of Mindy Markowitz is typical:  Art Director’s Panic Attacks   Mindy Markowitz is an attractive ... 25-year-old art director ... who comes to an anxiety clinic ... seeking treatment for “panic attacks” that have occurred with increasing frequency over the past year, often two or three times a day. These attacks begin with a sudden, intense wave of “horrible fear” that seems to come out of nowhere, sometimes during the day, sometimes waking her from sleep. She begins to tremble, is nauseated, sweats profusely, feels as though she is choking, and fears that she will lose control and do something crazy, like run screaming into the street. . . . Mindy has had panic attacks intermittently over the 8 years since her first attack, sometimes not for many months, but sometimes, as now, several times a day. There have been extreme variations in the intensity of the attacks, some being so severe and debilitating that she has had to take a day off from work. Mindy has always functioned extremely well in school, at work, and in her social life, apart from her panic attacks. . . . She is a lively, friendly person ... who has never limited her activities . . . She says . . . she is as likely to have an attack at home in her own bed as on the subway, so there is no point in avoiding the subway. . . . [Wherever] she has an attack . . . she says, “I just tough it out.” Source: Adapted with permission from   DSM-IV-TR Casebook: A Learning Companion to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fourth Edition, Text Revision (Copyright © 2002). American Psychiatric Association.  Agoraphobia  Historically, agoraphobia was thought to involve a fear of the  agora —the Greek word for public places of assembly (Marks, 1987). In   agoraphobia   the most commonly feared and avoided situations include streets and crowded places such as shopping malls, movie theaters, and stores. Standing in line can be par- ticularly difficult (see Table 6.2 on p. 180 for commonly avoided situations). What is the common theme that underlies this seem- ingly diverse cluster of fears? Sometimes, agoraphobia develops as a complication of having panic attacks in one or more such situations. Concerned that they may have a panic attack or get sick, people with agoraphobia are anxious about being in places or situations from which escape would be physically difficult or psychologically embarrassing, or in which immediate help would be unavailable if something bad happened (see the   DSM-5   box for diagnostic criteria). Typically people with agoraphobia are also frightened by their own bodily sensations, so they also avoid activities that will create arousal such as exercising, watching scary movies, drinking caffeine, and even engaging in sexual activity. As agoraphobia first develops, people tend to avoid situa- tions in which attacks have occurred, but usually the avoidance gradually spreads to other situations where attacks might occur. In moderately severe cases, people with agoraphobia may be anxious even when venturing outside their homes alone. In very severe cases, agoraphobia is an utterly disabling disorder in which  A.   Marked fear or anxiety about two (or more) of the following five situations:  1.   Using public transportation (e.g., automobiles, buses, trains, ships, planes).  2.   Being in open spaces (e.g., parking lots, marketplaces, bridges).  3.   Being in enclosed places (e.g., shops, theaters, cinemas).  4.   Standing in line or being in a crowd.  5.   Being outside of the home alone.  B.   The individual fears or avoids these situations because of thoughts that escape might be difficult or help might not be available in the event of developing panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms (e.g., fear of falling in the elderly; fear of incontinence).  C.   The agoraphobic situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety.  D.   The agoraphobic situations are actively avoided, require the presence of a companion, or are endured with intense fear or anxiety.  E.   The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the agoraphobic situations and to the sociocultural context.  F.   The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6 months or more.  G.   The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  h.   If another medical condition (e.g., inflammatory bowel dis- ease, Parkinson’s disease) is present, the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is clearly excessive.  i.   The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder—for example, the symptoms are not confined to specific phobia, situational type; do not involve only social situations (as in social anxiety disorder); and are not related exclusively to obsessions (as in obsessive-compulsive disorder), perceived defects or flaws in physical appearance (as in body dysmorphic disorder), remind- ers of traumatic events (as in posttraumatic stress disorder), or fear of separation (as in separation anxiety disorder).  Note:   Agoraphobia is diagnosed irrespective of the presence of panic disorder. If an individual’s presentation meets criteria for panic disorder and agoraphobia, both diagnoses should be assigned.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Agoraphobia   DSM- 5
a person cannot go beyond the narrow confines of home—or even particular parts of the home. The case of John D. is typical of someone with both panic disorder and agoraphobia.  John D.   John D. was a 45-year-old married Caucasian man with three sons. Although well educated and successful . . . John had been experiencing difficulties with panic attacks for 15 years . . . experiencing two to five panic attacks per month. The previous week John had had a panic attack while driving with his family to a computer store. He recollected that before the panic attack he might have been “keyed up” over the kids making a lot of noise in the back seat; the attack began right after he had quickly turned around to tell the kids to “settle down.” Immediately after he turned back to look at the road, John felt dizzy. As soon as he noticed this, John experienced a rapid and intense surge of other sensations including sweating, accelerated heart rate, hot flushes, and trembling. Fearing that he was going to crash the car, John quickly pulled to the side of the road . . . . John was having only a few panic attacks per month, but he was experiencing a high level of anxiety every day, focused on the possibility that he might have another panic attack at any time. Indeed, John had developed extensive apprehension or avoidance of driving, air travel, elevators, wide-open spaces, tak- ing long walks alone, movie theaters, and being out of town. [His] first panic attack had occurred 15 years ago. John had fallen asleep on the living room sofa at around 1:00   a   .   m   . after returning from a night of drinking with some of his friends. Just after awakening at 4:30, John felt stomach pains and a pulsating sensation in the back of his neck. All of a sudden, John noticed that his heart was racing, too. . . . Although he did not know what he was suffering from, John was certain that he was dying. John remembered having a second panic attack about a month later. From then on, the panic attacks began to occur more regularly. When the panic attacks became recurrent, John started to avoid situations in which the panic attacks had occurred as well as situations in which he feared a panic attack was likely to occur. On three occasions during the first few years of his panic attacks, John went to the emergency room of his local hospital because he was sure that his symptoms were a sign of a heart attack. Source: Adapted from Brown & Barlow, 2001, pp. 19–22.  Agoraphobia is a frequent complication of panic disorder. The case of John D. is typical. However, many patients with agoraphobia do not experience panic. Recognizing this, in   DSM-5   agoraphobia is now listed as a distinct disorder. As agoraphobia develops, there is often a gradually spreading fearfulness in which more and more aspects of the environment outside the home become threatening. The most recent estimate of the lifetime prevalence of agoraphobia without panic from the National Comorbidity Survey-Replication is 1.4 percent (e.g., Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2006).  Prevalence, Age of Onset, and Gender Differences  Many people suffer from panic disorder and from agoraphobia. The National Comorbidity Survey-Replication study found that approximately 4.7 percent of the adult population has had panic disorder with or without agoraphobia at some time in their lives, with panic disorder without agoraphobia being more common (Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2005c). Panic disorder with or without ago- raphobia often starts in the late teenage years, but the average age of onset is 23 to 34 years. However, it can begin, especially for women, in a person’s 30s or 40s (Hirschfeld, 1996; Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2006). Once panic disorder develops, it tends to have a chronic and disabling course, although the intensity of symptoms often waxes and wanes over time (Keller et al., 1994; White & Barlow, 2002). Indeed, one 12-year longitudinal study found that less than 50 percent of patients with panic disorder with agorapho- bia had recovered in 12 years, and 58 percent of those who had recovered at some point had had a recurrence (new onset; Bruce et al., 2005). Panic disorder is about twice as prevalent in women as in men (Eaton et al., 1994; White & Barlow, 2002). Agoraphobia also occurs much more frequently in women than in men, and the percentage of women increases as the extent of agoraphobic avoidance increases. Among people with severe agoraphobia, approximately 80 to 90 percent are female (Bekker, 1996; White & Barlow, 2002). Table 6.3 outlines gender differences in the prevalence of other anxiety disorders for comparison purposes. The most common explanation of the pronounced gender difference in agoraphobia is a sociocultural one (McLean & Anderson, 2009). In our culture (and many others as well), it is more acceptable for women who experience panic to avoid the situations they fear and to need a trusted companion to accompany them when they enter feared situations. Men who experience panic are more prone to “tough it out” because of societal expectations and their more assertive, instrumental approach to life (Bekker, 1996). Although there is very little research on this topic, one study consistent with this idea was  table   6.2  Situations Frequently Avoided by People with Agoraphobia  Crowds   Standing in line Theaters   Restaurants Shopping malls   Sports arenas Cars and buses   Trains and airplanes Bridges   Tunnels Escalators   Elevators Being home alone   Being far away from home Aeorbic exercise   Sauna baths Getting angry   Sexual activity Watching exciting or scary movies
conducted by Chambless and Mason (1986), who adminis- tered a sex-role scale to both male and female agoraphobics and found that the less “masculine” one scored on the scale, the more extensive the agoraphobic avoidance, for both males and females. Another study found that cultures and societies that delineate rigid gender roles at a sociocultural level tend to have higher levels of agoraphobia. In addition, some evidence indicates that men with panic disorder may be more likely to self-medicate with nicotine or alcohol as a way of coping with and enduring panic attacks rather than developing agorapho- bic avoidance (Starcevic et al., 2008).  Comorbidity with Other Disorders  The National Comorbidity Survey-Replication found that 83 percent of people with panic disorder have at least one comorbid disorder (Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2006). Most com- monly these include generalized anxiety disorder, social pho- bia, specific phobia, PTSD, depression, and substance-use disorders (especially smoking and alcohol dependence; Bern- stein et al., 2006; Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2006; Zvolensky & Ber- nstein, 2005). It is estimated that 50 to 70 percent of people with panic disorder will experience serious depression at some point in their lives (Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2006). They may also meet criteria for dependent or avoidant personality disorder (see  0). The issue of whether people with panic dis- order show an increased risk of suicidal ideation and suicide attempts has been quite controversial, with a number of stud- ies suggesting that any increased risk is due to indirect fac- tors such as comorbid depression and substance abuse, which are known risk factors themselves (e.g., Vickers & McNally, 2004). However, two recent very large epidemiological stud- ies (one in the United States, which had nearly 10,000 adults from the National Comorbidity Survey-Replication study, and one including over 100,000 people from 21 countries) have indeed found that panic disorder is associated with increased risk for suicidal ideation and attempts independent of its rela- tionship with comorbid disorders (Nock et al., 2009; Nock et al., 2010).  The Timing of a First Panic Attack  Although panic attacks themselves appear to come “out of the blue,” the first one frequently occurs following feelings of distress or some highly stressful life circumstance such as loss of a loved one, loss of an important relationship, loss of a job, or criminal victimization (see Barlow, 2002; Klauke et al., 2010, for reviews). Although not all studies have found this, some have estimated that approximately 80 to 90 percent of clients report that their first panic attack occurred after one or more negative life events. Nevertheless, not all people who have a panic attack fol- lowing a stressful event go on to develop full-blown panic disorder. Current estimates from the recent National Comor- bidity Survey-Replication are that nearly 23 percent of adults have experienced at least one panic attack in their lifetimes, but most have not gone on to develop full-blown panic disor- der (Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2006). People who have other anxi- ety disorders or major depression often experience occasional panic attacks as well (Barlow, 2002; Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2006). Given that panic attacks are much more frequent than panic disorder, this leads us to an important question: What causes full-blown panic disorder to develop in only a subset of these people? Several different prominent theories about the causes of panic disorder have addressed this question.  Biological Causal Factors GENETiC FACTOrS   According to family and twin studies, panic disorder has a moderate heritable component (e.g., Kendler et al., 1992b, 1992c; Kendler et al., 2001; Norrholm & Ressler, 2009). In a large twin study, Kendler and colleagues (2001) esti- mated that 33 to 43 percent of the variance in liability to panic disorder was due to genetic factors. As noted earlier, this genetic vulnerability is manifested at a psychological level at least in part by the important personality trait called neuroticism (which is in turn related to the temperamental construct of behavioral in- hibition). Recently, several studies have begun to identify which specific genetic polymorphisms are responsible for this moderate heritability (e.g., Strug et al., 2010), either alone or in interaction  table   6.3  Gender Differences in the Anxiety Disorders: lifetime Prevalence Estimates Disorder   Prevalence in men (%)   Prevalence in women (%)   ratio  Specific phobias   6.7   15.7   2.34 Social phobia   11.1   15.5   1.4 Panic disorder   2.0   5.0   2.5 Generalized anxiety disorder   3.6   6.6   1.8 Note: Because these figures are from different studies and may not be strictly comparable, they should be taken as approximations of current estimates of gender differences. Sources: Eaton et al. (1994); Karno et al. (1988); Kessler et al. (1994, 1995); Magee et al. (1996).
with certain types of stressful life events (e.g., Klauke et al., 2010), but this preliminary work needs to be replicated. Some studies have suggested that this heritability is at least partly specific for panic disorder (rather than for all anxiety dis- orders; see Barlow, 2002, for a review), but one large female twin study suggested that there is overlap in the genetic vulnerability fac- tors for panic disorder and phobias (Kendler, Walters, et al., 1995). This would be consistent with some preliminary evidence that people with a history of social or specific phobia are at heightened risk for developing panic disorder (Biederman et al., 2006). How- ever, another study suggests overlap in the genetic vulnerability for panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and agoraphobia (Hettema, Prescott, et al., 2005). Only further research can resolve these inconsistencies in findings (e.g., Norrholm & Ressler, 2009).  PANiC AND ThE BrAiN   One relatively early prominent theory about the neurobiology of panic attacks implicated the  locus coeruleus   in the brain stem (see Figure 6.1 on p. 183) and a particular neurotransmitter—norepinephrine—that is centrally involved in brain activity in this area (e.g., Goddard et al., 1996). However, today it is recognized that it is in- creased activity in the amygdala that plays a more central role in panic attacks than does activity in the locus coeruleus. The  amygdala   is a collection of nuclei in front of the hippocam- pus in the limbic system of the brain that is critically involved in the emotion of fear. Stimulation of the central nucleus of the amygdala is known to stimulate the locus coeruleus as well as the other autonomic, neuroendocrine, and behavioral responses that occur during panic attacks (e.g., Gorman et al., 2000; LeDoux, 2000). Other recent research has also im- plicated the periaqueductal gray area in the midbrain (e.g., Del-Ben & Graeff, 2008; Graeff & Del-Ben, 2008). Some research has suggested that the amygdala is the central area involved in what has been called a “fear network,” with con- nections not only to lower areas in the brain like the locus coeru- leus but also to higher brain areas like the   prefrontal cortex   (e.g., Gorman et al., 2000). According to this view, panic attacks occur when the fear network is activated, either by cortical inputs or by inputs from lower brain areas. So according to this influential the- ory, panic disorder is likely to develop in people who have abnor- mally sensitive fear networks that get activated too readily to be adaptive. This theory about abnormally sensitive fear networks is also consistent with findings that individuals with panic disorder showed heightened startle responses to loud noise stimuli as well as slower habituation of such responding (Ludewig et al., 2005; see also Shin & Liberzon, 2010). Sakai and colleagues (2005), using functional neuroimaging techniques, also found support for this neuroanatomical hypothesis. Abnormally sensitive fear net- works may have a partially heritable basis but may also develop as a result of repeated stressful life experiences, particularly early in life (e.g., Gorman et al., 2000; Ladd et al., 2000). But panic attacks are only one component of panic disorder. People with panic disorder also become anxious about the pos- sibility of another attack, and those with agoraphobia also engage in phobic avoidance behavior (e.g., Gorman et al., 1989, 2000). Different brain areas are probably involved in these different aspects of panic disorder. The panic attacks themselves arise from activity in the amygdala, either by cortical inputs (e.g., evaluat- ing a stimulus as highly threatening) or by activity coming from more downstream areas like the locus coeruleus. For people who have one or more panic attacks and who go on to develop signifi- cant conditioned anxiety about having another one in particular contexts, the   hippocampus   (also a part of the   limbic system , below the cortex, which is very involved in the learning of emotional responses; see Figure 6.1) is thought to generate this conditioned anxiety (e.g., Charney et al., 1998; Gray & McNaughton, 1996, 2000) and is probably also involved in the learned avoidance associated with agoraphobia (Gorman et al., 2000). Finally, the cognitive symptoms that occur during panic attacks (fears of dying or of losing control) and overreactions to the danger posed by possibly threatening bodily sensations are likely to be mediated by higher cortical centers (see Gorman et al., 2000; Etkin, 2010).  BiOChEmiCAl ABNOrmAliTiES   Over 30 years ago, Klein (1981) and others (Sheehan, 1982, 1983) argued that panic attacks are alarm reactions caused by biochemical dysfunctions.  People with severe agoraphobia are often fearful of venturing out of their homes into public places, in part because of their fear of having a panic attack in a place in which escape might prove physically difficult or psychologically embarrassing. They may even become housebound un- less accompanied by a spouse or trusted companion.
This hypothesis initially appeared to be supported by numerous studies over the past 40 years, showing that people with panic disorder are much more likely to experience panic attacks when they are exposed to various biological challenge procedures than are normal people or people with other psychiatric disorders. For example, some of these laboratory tests involve infusions of sodium lactate (a substance resembling the lactate our bodies produce during exercise; e.g., Gorman et al., 1989), inhaling air with altered amounts of carbon dioxide (e.g., Woods et al., 1987), or ingesting large amounts of caffeine (e.g., Uhde, 1990). In each case, such procedures produce panic attacks in panic disorder clients at a much higher rate than in normal subjects (see Barlow, 2002, for review). There is a broad range of these so-called   panic provocation procedures , and some of them are associated with quite different and even mutually exclusive neu- robiological processes. Thus, no single neurobiological mecha- nism could possibly be implicated (Barlow 2002; Roy-Byrne et al., 2006). However, as explained later in the section on causal factors, simpler biological and psychological explanations can account for this pattern of results. These alternative explana- tions stem from the observation that what all these biological challenge procedures have in common is that they put stress on certain neurobiological systems, which in turn produce intense physical symptoms of arousal (such as increased heart rate, respi- ration, and blood pressure). At present, two primary neurotransmitter systems are most implicated in panic attacks—the noradrenergic and the seroto- nergic systems (Gorman et al., 2000; Graeff & Del-Ben, 2008; Neumeister et al., 2004). Noradrenergic activity in certain brain areas can stimulate cardiovascular symptoms associated with panic (Gorman et al., 2000). Increased serotonergic activity also decreases noradrenergic activity. This fits with results showing that the medications most widely used to treat panic disorder today (the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors—SSRIs) seem to increase serotonergic activity in the brain but also to decrease noradrenergic activity. By decreasing noradrenergic activity, these medications decrease many of the cardiovascular symptoms associated with panic that are ordinarily stimulated by noradren- ergic activity (Gorman et al., 2000). The inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA has also been implicated in the anticipatory anxiety that many people with panic disorder have about experiencing another attack. GABA is known to inhibit anxiety and has been shown to be abnormally low in certain parts of the cortex in people with panic disorder (Goddard, Mason, et al., 2001, 2004).  Psychological Causal Factors COmPrEhENSiVE lEArNiNG ThEOry OF PANiC DiSOrDEr   Certain investigators have proposed a comprehen- sive learning theory of panic disorder that accounts for most of the known findings about panic disorder (Bouton, Mineka, & Barlow, 2001; see also Barlow, 2002; Bouton, 2005; Mineka & Zinbarg, 2006). Along with advances in the study of classical conditioning, this theory builds on the earlier theory that initial internal bodily sensations of anxiety or arousal (such as heart pal- pitations) effectively become interoceptive conditioned stimuli associated with higher levels of anxiety or arousal (Goldstein &  Limbic system Locus coeruleus  Prefrontal cortex Thalamus Cingulate gyrus Fornix  Amygdala  Hippocampus Stria terminalis Pituitary Hypothalamus Midbrain Pons Medulla oblongata  Brain stem  figure   6.1  A Biological Theory of Panic, Anxiety, and Agoraphobia.   According to one theory, panic attacks may arise from abnormal activity in the amygdala, a collection of nuclei in front of the hippocampus in the limbic system. The anticipatory anxiety that people develop about having another panic attack is thought to arise from activity in the hippocampus of the limbic system, which is known to be involved in the learning of emotional responses. Agoraphobic avoidance, also a learned response, may also involve activity of the hippocampus and higher cortical centers   (Gorman et al., 2000) .
Chambless, 1978). According to this theory, initial panic attacks become associated with initially neutral internal (interoceptive) and external (exteroceptive) cues through an   interoceptive con- ditioning   (or   exteroceptive conditioning ) process (e.g., Acheson et al., 2007; Forsyth & Eifert, 1998). One primary effect of this conditioning is that anxiety becomes conditioned to these CSs, and the more intense the panic attack, the more robust the conditioning that will occur (Forsyth et al., 2000). Other types of instrumental and avoidance learning are also in- volved but will not be explained here. This conditioning of anxiety to the internal or external cues associated with panic thus sets the stage for the development of two of the three components of panic disorder: anticipatory anxiety and sometimes agoraphobic fears. Specifically, when people experience their initial panic attacks (which are terrifying emotional events replete with strong internal bodily sensations), interoceptive and exeroceptive conditioning can occur to mul- tiple different kinds of cues, ranging from heart palpitations and dizziness to shopping malls. Because anxiety becomes condi- tioned to these CSs, anxious apprehension about having another attack, particularly in certain contexts, may develop, as may agoraphobic avoidance of contexts in which panic attacks might occur in a subset of individuals. Moreover, a recent study dem- onstrated that once an individual has developed panic disorder they show greater generalization of conditioned responding to other similar cues than do controls without panic disorder (Lissek et al., 2010). In individuals who have panic disorder, a recent study showed that extinction of conditioned anxiety responses occurs more slowly than in normal controls (Michael, Blechert, et al., 2007). Because extinction involves inhibitory learning, which seems to be impaired in panic disorder, it is not surprising that individuals with panic disorder also show impaired discriminative conditioning because of their deficits in learning that a CS is a safety cue (Lissek et al., 2009). However, another important effect is that panic attacks themselves (the third component of panic disorder) are also likely to be conditioned to certain internal cues. This leads to the occur- rence of panic attacks that seemingly come out of the blue when people unconsciously experience certain internal bodily sensations (CSs). For example, one young man with panic disorder who was particularly frightened of signs that his heart was racing experi- enced a surprising and unexpected panic attack after hearing that his favorite presidential candidate had won. The panic attack thus occurred when he was happy and excited (which is what made it so surprising for him). However, from the standpoint of this theory, the attack was actually not surprising. Because the man was excited, his heart was racing, which probably served as an internal CS that triggered the panic (Mineka & Zinbarg, 2006). This theory also underscores why not everyone who experiences an occasional panic attack goes on to develop panic disorder. Instead, people with certain genetic, temperamental or personal- ity, or cognitive-behavioral vulnerabilities will show stronger con- ditioning of both anxiety and panic (Barlow, 2002; Bouton et al., 2001; Mineka & Zinbarg, 2006). For example, the personality variable that clearly serves as a risk variable is neuroticism.  COGNiTiVE ThEOry OF PANiC   An earlier cognitive theory of panic disorder proposed that individuals with panic disorder are hypersensitive to their bodily sensations and are very prone to giv- ing them the direst possible interpretation (Beck & Emery, 1985; D. M. Clark, 1986, 1997). Clark referred to this as a tendency to catastrophize about the meaning of their bodily sensations. For example, a person who develops panic disorder might notice that his heart is racing and conclude that he is having a heart attack, or notice that he is dizzy, which may lead to fainting or to the thought that he may have a brain tumor. These very frightening thoughts may cause many more physical symptoms of anxiety, which further fuel the catastrophic thoughts, leading to a vicious circle culminating in a panic attack (see Figure 6.2). The person is not necessarily aware of making these catastrophic interpreta- tions; rather, the thoughts are often just barely out of the realm of  Trigger stimulus (internal or external) Trigger stimulus (internal or external) (e.g., exercise, excitement, anger, sexual arousal, coffee, psychoactive drugs) Perceived threat Body sensations Interpretation of sensations as catastrophic Apprehension or worry (e.g., about having a panic attack or about any distressing situation)  The Panic Circle  figure   6.2  The Panic Circle.   Any kind of perceived threat may lead to apprehension or worry, which is accompanied by various bodily sensations. According to the cognitive model of panic, if a person then catastrophizes about the meaning of his or her bodily sensations, this will raise the level of per- ceived threat, thus creating more apprehension and worry as well as more physical symptoms, which fuel further catastrophic thoughts. This vicious circle can culminate in a panic attack. The initial physical sensations need not arise from the perceived threat (as shown at the top of the circle) but may come from other sources (exercise, anger, psychoactive drugs, etc., as shown at the bottom of the circle).   (Adapted from D. M. Clark, 1986, 1997.)
awareness (Rapee, 1996). These   automatic thoughts , as Beck calls them, are in a sense the triggers of panic. Although it is not yet clear how the tendency to catastrophize develops, the cognitive model proposes that only people with this tendency to catastroph- ize go on to develop panic disorder (e.g., D. M. Clark, 1997). Several lines of evidence are consistent with the cognitive theory of panic disorder. For example, people with panic disorder are much more likely to interpret their bodily sensations in a catastrophic manner (e.g., see D. M. Clark, 1997; Teachman et al., 2007), and the greater the tendency to do so, the greater the severity of panic (Casey et al., 2005). The model also predicts that changing their cognitions about their bodily symptoms should reduce or prevent panic. Evidence that cognitive therapy for panic works is consistent with this prediction (D. M. Clark et al., 1994, 1999). In addition, a brief explanation of what to expect in a panic provocation study can apparently prevent or reduce panic symptoms (D. M. Clark, 1997). People with panic disorder either were given a brief, but detailed, explanation of what physical symptoms to expect from an infusion of sodium lactate and why they should not worry about these symp- toms, or were given a minimal explanation. The people with the cognitive rationale about what to expect were significantly less likely to say that they had had the subjective experience of a panic attack in response to the lactate (30 percent) than were control individuals (90 percent) (see Schmidt et al., 2006, for related results).  lEArNiNG AND COGNiTiVE ExPlANATiONS OF rESulTS FrOm PANiC PrOVOCATiON STuDiES   Earlier, we noted that there are simpler psychological explanations that provide a com- mon mechanism for understanding how so many varied panic provocation agents can all provoke panic at high rates in people with panic disorder. Because these agents produce arousal, they mimic the physiological cues that normally precede a panic attack or may be taken as a sign of some other impending catastrophe (Barlow, 2002; Bouton et al., 2001; Margraf et al., 1986a, 1986b). People with panic disorder already start at a higher level of arousal than others and are very familiar with these early warning cues. Thus, according to the cognitive theory, people with panic at- tacks frequently misinterpret these symptoms as the beginning of a panic attack or a heart attack, which in turn induces the vicious circle of panic described in the previous section; this would not happen in controls who do not have the same tendency to cata- strophize. Alternatively, according to the learning theory of panic disorder, it would be only those with panic disorder for whom these cues might serve as interoceptive CSs that can trigger anxiety and panic because of their prior associations with panic. The key difference between these two theories in explaining the results of panic provocation studies lies in the great impor- tance that the cognitive model places on the meaning that people attach to their bodily sensations; they will experience panic only if they make catastrophic interpretations of certain bodily sensations. Such catastrophic cognitions are not necessary with the interoceptive conditioning model because anxiety and panic attacks can be triggered by unconscious interoceptive (or extero- ceptive) cues (Bouton et al., 2001). Thus the learning theory model is better able to explain the occurrence of the panic attacks that often occur without any preceding negative (catastrophic) automatic thoughts, as well as the occurrence of nocturnal panic attacks that occur during sleep; the occurrence of both of these kinds of attacks is difficult for the cognitive model to explain (see the Developments in Research box below).  developments in ReSeARCH  Nocturnal Panic Attacks  A lthough the majority of panic attacks experienced by people with panic disorder occur during waking hours, approximately 50 to 60 percent of people report that they have experienced a panic attack during sleep at least once (Barlow, 2002; O’Mahony & Ward, 2003). Nocturnal panic refers to waking from sleep in a state of panic. It seems to occur with some regularity in about 20 to 40 percent of people with panic disorder and is frequently associated with insomnia and frequent awakenings during sleep (Craske et al., 2002; Overbeek et al., 2005; Papadimitriou & Linkowski, 2005). Although one might think that such panic attacks occur in response to nightmares, considerable research shows that this is not the case. Sleep has five stages that occur in a fairly invariant sequence multiple times throughout the night: one stage called REM sleep (rapid eye movement sleep) when vivid dreaming occurs, and four stages of non-REM sleep (Stages 1–4) when vivid dreams do not occur. If nocturnal panic attacks occurred in response to dreams, we would expect them to occur during REM sleep (when night- mares usually occur), but in fact they occur during Stage 2 and early Stage 3 sleep, usually a few hours after falling asleep. It is important to note that nocturnal panic attacks are differ- ent from “sleep terrors” or “night terrors,” which usually occur during Stage 4 sleep. Night terrors are usually experienced by children, who often scream and then fear that someone or something is chasing them around the room; however, they do not wake up (Barlow, 2002). Nocturnal panic attacks also differ from isolated sleep paralysis, which can sometimes occur dur- ing the transition from sleep to waking. It involves awareness of one’s surroundings accompanied by a stark sense of terror (resembling that during a panic attack) and an inability to move, which seems to occur because the individuals are waking from REM (dream) sleep, when there is suppression of muscle activity below the neck (e.g., Hinton et al, 2005).
  ANxiETy SENSiTiViTy AND PErCEiVED CONTrOl   Other cognitive and learning explanations of panic and agoraphobia have looked at a number of different factors that can generally be explained within either the learning or cognitive perspective. For example, several researchers have shown that people who have high levels of anxiety sensitivity are more prone to develop- ing panic attacks and perhaps panic disorder (McNally, 2002; Pagura et al., 2009).   Anxiety sensitivity   is a trait-like belief that certain bodily symptoms may have harmful consequences. Such a person would endorse statements such as, “When I notice that my heart is beating rapidly, I worry that I might have a heart at- tack.” In one important study, Schmidt and colleagues (1997) followed over 1,400 young adults undergoing basic military training for 5 weeks. They found that high levels of anxiety sen- sitivity predicted the development of spontaneous panic attacks during this highly stressful period. Several other studies examin- ing the same issues obtained very similar results, thus boosting confidence in the reliability of anxiety sensitivity as a predictor of panic attacks (e.g., Hayward et al., 2000; Li & Zinbarg, 2007). However, Schmidt and colleagues (2006) have reported results showing that high anxiety sensitivity also serves to predict the onset of other anxiety disorders as well as panic attacks, thus rais- ing some questions about the specificity of its role for panic ver- sus other anxiety disorders (see also Starcevic & Berle, 2006). In addition, several important studies have shown that sim- ply having a sense of   perceived control —for instance, over the amount of carbon-dioxide-altered air that is inhaled (a panic provocation procedure known frequently to bring on anxiety and panic)—reduces anxiety and even blocks panic (e.g., Sand- erson et al., 1989; Zvolensky et al., 1998, 1999). In addition, if a person with panic disorder is accompanied by a “safe” person when undergoing a panic provocation procedure, that person is likely to show reduced distress, lowered physiological arousal, and reduced likelihood of panic relative to someone who came alone (without a “safe” person; Carter et al., 1995). Moreover, a recent study has shown that anxiety sensitivity has a greater effect on panic symptoms in people with low perceived control (Bent- ley et al., 2012). Finally, individuals with panic disorder may also be protected against the development of agoraphobic avoid- ance if they have relatively high levels of perceived control over their emotions and threatening situations (Suarez et al., 2009; White et al., 2006).  SAFETy BEhAViOrS AND ThE PErSiSTENCE OF PANiC  Why do people who have developed panic disorder continue to have panic attacks in spite of the fact that their direst predictions rarely, if ever, come true? Some people with panic disorder may, for example, have three or four panic attacks a week for 20 years; each time they may believe they are having a heart attack, and yet they never do. After experiencing hundreds or thousands of panic attacks without having a heart attack, one would think, from the cognitive perspective, that this catastrophic thought would have been proved wrong so many times that it would finally go away. However, evidence suggests that such discon- firmation does not occur because people with panic disorder frequently engage in safety behaviors (such as breathing slowly or carrying a bottle with anxiolytic medication) before or dur- ing an attack. They then mistakenly tend to attribute the lack of catastrophe to their having engaged in this safety behavior rather than to the idea that panic attacks actually do not lead to heart attacks. Similarly, people who think they may faint will tend to lean against solid objects (D. A. Clark, 1997; Salkovskis et al., 1996). Research suggests that it is important during treatment to identify these safety behaviors so that the person can learn to give them up and finally see that the feared catastrophe still does not occur. Indeed, a good number of studies have found that asking people to drop their safety behaviors during cognitive-behavioral treatment can increase the effectiveness of the treatment (e.g., Rachman et al., 2008).  COGNiTiVE BiASES AND ThE mAiNTENANCE OF PANiC  Finally, many studies have shown that people with panic disor- der are biased in the way they process threatening information. Such people not only interpret ambiguous bodily sensations as threatening (D. A. Clark, 1997; Teachman et al., 2006), but they also interpret other ambiguous situations as more threaten- ing than do controls. People with panic disorder also seem to have their attention automatically drawn to threatening informa- tion in their environment such as words that represent things they fear, such as palpitations, numbness, or faint (see Lim & Kim, 2005; Mathews & MacLeod, 2005; Mineka et al., 2003, for reviews). One study using fMRI techniques demonstrated that people with panic disorder showed greater activation to  Many people experiencing a panic attack mistake their symptoms (for example, chest pain and shortness of breath) for another medical problem— most often a heart attack.
threat words than did normals in brain areas involved in memory processing of threatening material (Maddock et al., 2003). Whether these information-processing biases are present before the disorder begins and help to cause it is as yet unclear, but these biases are certainly likely to help maintain the disorder once it has begun. For example, having one’s attention automati- cally drawn to threatening cues in the environment is likely to provoke more attacks. In summary, research into both biological and psychoso- cial factors involved in panic disorder has provided important insights into this disorder since it was first identified as a distinct disorder in 1980. It seems unlikely that research from either tradition alone will ever provide a complete account of this dis- order, and we eagerly await more attempts at synthesizing these findings into a biopsychosocial theory.  Treatments mEDiCATiONS   Many people with panic disorder (with or with- out agoraphobia) are prescribed   anxiolytics   (antianxiety medi- cations) from the benzodiazepine category such as alprazolam (Xanax) or clonazepam (Klonopin). These people frequently show some symptom relief from these medications, and many can function more effectively. One major advantage of these drugs is that they act very quickly (30–60 minutes) and so can be useful in acute situations of intense panic or anxiety. However, these anxiolytic medications can also have quite undesirable side effects such as drowsiness and sedation, which can lead to im- paired cognitive and motor performance. Also, with prolonged use, most people using moderate to high doses develop physi- ological dependence on the drug, which results in withdrawal symptoms when the drug is discontinued (e.g., nervousness, sleep disturbance, dizziness, and further panic attacks). With- drawal from these drugs can be very slow and difficult, and it precipitates relapse in a high percentage of cases (Pollack & Si- mon, 2009; Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2007). These are the reasons why benzodiazepines are no longer considered as a first-choice treatment (Katon, 2006). The other category of medication that is useful in the treat- ment of panic disorder and agoraphobia is the antidepressants (including primarily the tricyclics, the SSRIs, and most recently the serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors—SNRIs). These medications have both advantages and disadvantages com- pared with anxiolytics. One major advantage is that they do not create physiological dependence in the way benzodiazepines can, and they also can alleviate any comorbid depressive symptoms or disorders (Pollack & Simon, 2009; Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2007). However, it takes about 4 weeks before they have any beneficial effects, so they are not useful in an acute situation where a person is having a panic attack. Troublesome side effects (such as dry mouth, constipation, and blurred vision with the tricyclics, and interference with sexual arousal with the SSRIs) mean that large numbers of people refuse to take the medications or discontinue their use. Moreover, relapse rates when the drugs are discontinued are quite high (although not as high as with the benzodiazepines; Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2007). Today the SSRIs are more widely prescribed than the tri- cyclics because the SSRIs are generally better tolerated by most patients. Moreover, both are generally preferred by physicians to benzodiazepines because of the risks associated with the latter (Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2007).  BEhAViOrAl AND COGNiTiVE-BEhAViOrAl TrEATmENTS  The original behavioral treatment for agoraphobia from the early 1970s involved prolonged exposure to feared situations, often with the help of a therapist or family member. Similar to what is done with specific and social phobias, the idea was to make people gradually face the situations they feared and learn that there was nothing to fear. Such exposure-based treatments were quite effective and helped about 60 to 75 percent of people with agoraphobia show clinically significant improvement (Barlow et al., 2007). These effects were generally well maintained at 2- to 4-year follow-up. But this left approximately 25 to 40 percent not improved to a   clinically significant   degree (Barlow et al., 2002). One limitation of these original treatments was that they did not specifically target panic attacks. In the mid-1980s, two new techniques were developed as clinical researchers increasingly recognized the importance of panic attacks to most people with agoraphobia. One technique involves the variant on exposure known as   interoceptive exposure , meaning deliberate exposure to feared internal sensations. The idea was that fear of these internal sensations should be treated in the same way that fear of external agoraphobic situations is treated—namely, through prolonged exposure to those internal sensations so that the fear may extin- guish. For example, people are asked to engage in various exer- cises that bring on various internal sensations (e.g., spinning in a chair, hyperventilating, running in place) and to stick with those sensations until they subside, thereby allowing habituation of their fears of these sensations. The second set of techniques that were developed is  cognitive restructuring   techniques, in recognition that cata- strophic automatic thoughts may help maintain panic attacks. One kind of integrative cognitive-behavioral treatment for panic  research CLoSe-Up  Clinically Significant  Not all statistically significant changes are of sufficient mag- nitude to be clinically significant. Clinical significance reflects how large the effects of a particular treatment or intervention are with respect to how much meaningful change they pro- vide in a person’s level of functioning or well-being.
  disorder— panic control treatment —targets both agoraphobic avoidance and panic attacks. There are several aspects to PCT. First, clients are educated about the nature of anxiety and panic and how the capacity to experience both is adaptive. A second part of the treatment involves teaching people with panic disorder to control their breathing. Third, clients are taught about the logical errors that pople who have panic disorders are prone to making and learn to subject their own automatic thoughts to a logical reanalysis. Finally, they are exposed to feared situations and feared bodily sensations to build up a tolerance to the discomfort. Generally, this integrative treatment produces better results than the original exposure-based techniques that focused exclusively on exposure to external situations (D. M. Clark, 1997; Arch & Craske, 2009). In many of the studies conducted using one of the variants on these treatments, 70 to 90 percentof people with panic disorder were panic free at the end of 8 to 14 weeks of treat- ment, and gains were well maintained at 1- to 2-year follow-up (Arch & Craske, 2008; McCabe & Gifford, 2009). Overall, the magnitude of improvement is often greater with these cognitive and behavioral treatments than with medications (Arch & Craske, 2009; Barlow et al., 2002). Moreover, these treatments have been extended and shown to be very useful in treating people who also have nocturnal panic (Arch & Craske, 2008). What about the combination of antianxiety medication and cognitive-behavioral therapy? In the short term, such combined treatment sometimes produces a slightly superior result compared to either type of treatment alone (Barlow et al., 2007; Mitte, 2005). In addition, one study showed that those individuals who had received combined treatment showed fewer medication side effects and fewer dropouts than those who had used medication alone (Marcus, Gor- man, et al., 2007). However, in the long term, after medication has been tapered (especially benzodiazepine medications), clients who have been on medication with or without cognitive or behav- ioral treatment seem to show a greater likelihood of relapse (Arch & Craske, 2008; Barlow et al., 2002; Marks et al., 1993). Perhaps this is because they have attributed their gains to the medication rather than to their personal efforts (Başoğlu et al., 1994; Mitte, 2005). The one medication that has shown promise for enhancing responsiveness to CBT of panic disorder is D-cyloserine—the same medication discussed earlier that can enhance the speed of treating specific and social phobias (Otto et al., 2009).  in review  •   You are experiencing a panic attack. What are your symptoms?  •   Describe the major diagnostic features of both panic disorder and agoraphobia. Why do the two disorders often occur together?  •   What biological causal factors have been implicated in panic dis- order?  •   Compare and contrast the learning or conditioning theory and cognitive models of panic disorder.  •   Describe the major treatment approaches for panic disorder and their relative advantages and disadvantages.  Generalized Anxiety Disorder  Most of us worry and get anxious occasionally, and anxiety is an adaptive emotion that helps us plan and prepare for possible threat. But for some people, anxiety and worry about many dif- ferent aspects of life (including minor events) becomes chronic, excessive, and unreasonable. In these cases,   generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)   (formerly known as free-floating anxiety) may be diagnosed.   DSM-5   criteria specify that the worry must occur on more days than not for at least 6 months and that it must be experienced as difficult to control (see   DSM-5   criteria box). The worry must be about a number of different events or activities, and its content cannot be exclusively related to the worry associ- ated with another concurrent disorder, such as the possibility of having a panic attack. The subjective experience of excessive worry must also be accompanied by at least three of six other symptoms, as listed in the table, such as muscle tension or being easily fatigued. There was much discussion among the task force working on revisions for   DSM-5   as to whether this is the optimal set of criteria for GAD (e.g., the 6-month duration requirement and the excessive worry requirement; e.g., Andrews et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2009; Ruscio et al., 2005) and whether this is the opti- mal name for the disorder (versus generalized worry disorder or pathological worry disorder) (Andrews et al., 2010). However, in the end a conservative approach was taken and no changes were made from   DSM-IV   to   DSM-5 . The general picture of people suffering from generalized anxiety disorder is that they live in a relatively constant future- oriented mood state of anxious apprehension, chronic tension, worry, and diffuse uneasiness that they cannot control. They also show marked vigilance for possible signs of threat in the environment and frequently engage in subtle avoidance activi- ties such as procrastination, checking, or calling a loved one  Muscle tension, rest- lessness, and difficulty concentrating are all symptoms that people with generalized anxi- ety disorder may have. Such individuals also worry excessively and are hypervigilant for possible signs of threat in their environment.
frequently to see if he or she is safe (Barlow, 2002; Barlow et al., 1996). Such anxious apprehension also occurs in other anxiety disorders (for example, the person with agoraphobia shows antici- patory anxiety about future panic attacks and about dying, and the person with social phobia is anxious about possible negative social evaluation). But this apprehension is the essence of GAD, leading Barlow and others to refer to GAD as the “basic” anxiety disorder (Roemer et al., 2002; Wells & Butler, 1997).   Watch   the  Video   Philip: Generalized Anxiety Disorder   on   MyPsychLab . The nearly constant worries of people with generalized anxiety disorder leave them continually upset and discouraged. In one study, the most common spheres of worry were found to be family, work, finances, and personal illness (Roemer et al., 1997). Not only do they have difficulty making decisions, but after they have managed to make a decision they worry endlessly, even after going to bed, over possible errors and unforeseen cir- cumstances that may prove the decision wrong and lead to disas- ter. They have no appreciation of the logic by which most of us conclude that it is pointless to torment ourselves about possible outcomes over which we have no control. As two researchers in this area put it, “The result is that they fail to escape the illusory world created in their thoughts and images and rarely experi- ence the present moment that possesses the potential to bring them joy” (Behar & Borkovec, 2006, p. 184). It is not surprising then that a recent study of the personal and economic burden of GAD found that those with GAD experienced a similar amount of role impairment and lessened quality of life to those with major depression (Hofmann et al., 2010). The case below is fairly typical of generalized anxiety disorder.  A Graduate Student with GAD   John was a 26-year- old, single graduate student in the social sciences at a presti- gious university. He reported that he had had problems with anxiety nearly all his life, but they had become worse since he had left home and gone to an Ivy League college. During the past year his anxiety had seriously interfered with his function- ing, and he worried about several different spheres of his life such as his own and his parents’ health. During one incident a few months earlier, he had thought that his heart was beating more slowly than usual, and he had experienced some tingling sensations; this led him to worry that he might die. In another incident he had heard his name spoken over a loudspeaker in an airport and had worried that someone at home must be dying. He was also very worried about his future because his anxiety had kept him from completing his master’s thesis on time. John also worried excessively about getting a bad grade even though he had never had one either in college or in graduate school. In classes he worried excessively about what the professor and other students thought of him. Although he had a number of  A.   Excessive anxiety and worry (apprehensive expectation), occurring more days than not for at least 6 months, about a number of events or activities (such as work or school performance).  B.   The individual finds it difficult to control the worry.  C.   The anxiety and worry are associated with three (or more) of the following six symptoms (with at least some symptoms having been present for more days than not for the past 6 months):  Note:   Only one item is required in children.  1.   Restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge.  2.   Being easily fatigued.  3.   Difficulty concentrating or mind going blank.  4.   Irritability.  5.   Muscle tension.  6.   Sleep disturbance (difficulty falling or staying asleep, or restless, unsatisfying sleep).  D.   The anxiety, worry, or physical symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  E.   The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).  F.   The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., anxiety or worry about having panic attacks in panic disorder, negative evaluation in social anxiety dis- order [social phobia], contamination or other obsessions in obsessive-compulsive disorder, separation from attachment figures in separation anxiety disorder, reminders of trau- matic events in posttraumatic stress disorder, gaining weight in anorexia nervosa, physical complaints in somatic symptom disorder, perceived appearance flaws in body dysmorphic disorder, having a serious illness in illness anxiety disorder, or the content of delusional beliefs in schizophrenia or delu- sional disorder). Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Generalized Anxiety Disorder   DSM- 5
  friends, he had never had a girlfriend because of his shyness about dating. He had no problem talking or socializing with women as long as it was not defined as a dating situation. He worried that he should date a woman only if he was quite sure, from the outset, that it could be a serious relationship. He also worried excessively that if a woman did not want to date him, it meant that he was boring. In addition to his worries, which he perceived as uncon- trollable, John reported muscle tension and becoming easily fatigued. He also reported great difficulty concentrating and a considerable amount of restlessness and pacing. At times he had difficulty falling asleep if he was particularly anxious, but at other times he slept excessively, in part to escape from his worries. He frequently experienced dizziness and palpitations, and in the past he had had full-blown panic attacks. John’s mother was also quite anxious and had been treated for panic disorder. John was obviously extremely bright and had managed to do very well in school in spite of his lifelong problems with anxiety. But as the pressures of finishing graduate school and starting his career loomed before him, and as he got older and had still never dated, the anxiety became so severe that he sought treatment.  Prevalence, Age of Onset, and Gender Differences  Generalized anxiety disorder is a relatively common condition; current estimates from the National Comorbidity Survey- Replication are that approximately 3 percent of the population suffers from it in any 1-year period and 5.7 percent at some point in their lives (Kessler et al., 1994; Kessler, Berglund, Demler, et al., 2005; Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2005c). It also tends to be chronic. One 12-year follow-up study of people diag- nosed with GAD found that 42 percent had not remitted 13 years later and of those who had remitted, nearly half had had a recurrence (Bruce et al., 2005; see also Hofmann et al., 2010). However, after age 50 the disorder seems to disappear for many people (Rubio & Lopez-Ibor, 2007). If it disappears it tends to be replaced by a somatic symptom disorder and characterized by physical symptoms and health concerns. GAD is approximately twice as common in women as in men (a somewhat less dramatic difference than is seen with many specific phobias or severe agoraphobia; see Table 6.3 for summaries of gender differences in the different anxiety disor- ders). Although GAD is quite common, most people with this disorder manage to function (albeit with some role impair- ment) in spite of their high levels of worry and low perceived well-being (Hofmann et al., 2010; Stein et al., 2004). They are less likely to go to clinics for psychological treatment than are people with panic disorder or major depressive disorder, which are frequently more debilitating conditions. However, people with GAD do frequently show up in physicians’ offices with medical complaints (such as muscle tension or gastro- intestinal and/or cardiac symptoms) and are known to be overusers of health care resources (similar to people with panic disorder; Greenberg et al., 1999; Hofmann et al., 2010; Katon et al., 2002). Age of onset is often difficult to determine because 60 to 80 percent of people with GAD remember having been anxious nearly all their lives, and many others report a slow and insidious onset (Roemer et al., 2002; Wells & Butler, 1997). However, research has also documented that GAD often develops in older adults, for whom it is the most common anxiety disorder (e.g., Mackenzie et al., 2011; Stein, 2004).  Comorbidity with Other Disorders  Generalized anxiety disorder often co-occurs with other disor- ders, especially other anxiety and mood disorders such as panic disorder, social phobia, specific phobia, PTSD, and major depressive disorder (Brown, Campbell, et al., 2001; Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2005c; Tyrer & Baldwin, 2006). In addition, many people with GAD (like John) experience occasional panic attacks without qualifying for a diagnosis of panic disorder (Barlow, 1988, 2002). Nor is it surprising that excessive use of tranquiliz- ing drugs, sleeping pills, and alcohol often complicates the clinical picture in generalized anxiety disorder (Tyrer & Baldwin, 2006).  Watch   the   Video   Christy: Generalized Anxiety Disorder with Insomnia   on   MyPsychLab .  Psychological Causal Factors The PsyChOAnAlyTiC ViewPOinT   According to this viewpoint, generalized or free-floating anxiety results from an unconscious conflict between ego and id impulses that is not adequately dealt with because the person’s defense mecha- nisms have either broken down or have never developed. Freud believed that it was primarily sexual and aggressive impulses that had been either blocked from expression or pun- ished upon expression that led to free-floating anxiety. De- fense mechanisms may become overwhelmed when a person experiences frequent and extreme levels of anxiety, as might happen if id impulses are frequently blocked from expression (e.g., under periods of prolonged sexual deprivation). Accord- ing to this view, the primary difference between specific pho- bias and free-floating anxiety is that in phobias, the defense mechanisms of repression and displacement of an external object or situation actually work, whereas in free-floating anxi- ety these defense mechanisms do not work, leaving the person anxious nearly all the time. Unfortunately this viewpoint is not testable and has therefore been largely abandoned among clinical researchers.
PErCEPTiONS OF uNCONTrOllABiliTy AND uNPrEDiCT- ABiliTy   Uncontrollable and unpredictable aversive events are much more stressful than controllable and predictable aversive events, so it is perhaps not surprising that the former create more fear and anxiety, as we discussed with specific and social pho- bias (Barlow, 2002; Craske & Waters, 2005; Mineka, 1985b; Mineka & Oehlberg, 2008; Mineka & Zinbarg, 1996, 2006). Conversely, experience with controlling aspects of one’s life may immunize one against developing general anxiety (Chorpita, 2001; Mineka & Kelly, 1989). This has led researchers to hypothesize that people with GAD may have a history of experiencing many important events in their lives as unpredictable or uncontrollable. For example, having a boss or spouse who has unpredictable bad moods or outbursts of temper for seemingly trivial reasons might keep a person in a chronic state of anxiety. Although the unpredictable and uncontrollable events involved in GAD are generally not as severe and traumatic as those involved in the origins of PTSD, there is some evidence that people with GAD may be more likely to have had a history of trauma in childhood than individuals with several other anxiety disorders (Borkovec et al., 2004; see also Kendler, Hettema, et al., 2003). Moreover, people with GAD clearly have far less tolerance for uncertainty than nonanxious controls and than people with panic disorder (Dugas et al., 2004, 2005; Koerner & Dugas, 2008). This low tolerance for uncertainty in people with GAD suggests that they are especially disturbed by not being able to predict the future (as none of us can; Roemer et al., 2002). Some findings also show the greater the intolerance of uncertainty, the more severe the GAD (Dugas et al., 2007). Intolerance for uncer- tainty also seems to be elevated in individuals with obsessive compulsive disorder (e.g., Behar et al., 2008). In addition, perhaps some of these people’s intolerance for uncertainty, as well as their tension and hypervigilance (the sense of always looking for signs of threat), stems from their lacking safety signals in their environment. If a person mostly experiences predictable stressors (e.g., on Mondays the boss is always in a bad mood and is likely to be highly criti- cal), he or she cannot only predict when something bad is likely to happen (e.g., Mondays at work) but can also feel safe when that signal is missing (a safety signal; e.g., Tues- days through Fridays at work). But if another person has experienced many unpredictable or unsignaled stressors (e.g., the boss is in a bad mood and highly critical on ran- dom days of the week), she or he will not have developed safety signals for when it is appropriate to relax and feel safe, and this uncertainty may lead to chronic anxiety (Mineka, 1985a; Mineka & Zinbarg, 1996; Seligman & Binik, 1977). Thus a relative lack of safety signals may help explain why people with GAD feel constantly tense and vigilant for possible threats (Rapee, 2001).  A SENSE OF mASTEry: ThE POSSiBiliTy OF immuNiziNG AGAiNST ANxiETy   A person’s history of control over impor- tant aspects of his or her environment is another important expe- riential variable strongly affecting reactions to anxiety-provoking situations. Although we cannot study this experimentally in humans, we can learn a lot from laboratory analogue studies in animals. For example, one longitudinal experiment with in- fant rhesus monkeys found that infant monkeys reared with a sense of mastery and control over their environments for 7 to 10 months later adapted more readily to frightening events and novel anxiety-provoking situations than did monkeys reared in environments that were identical except for the experiences with control (Mineka, Gunnar, & Champoux, 1986; see also Chorpita & Barlow, 1998; Craske & Waters, 2005; Mineka & Zinbarg, 1996, 2006). In human children, experiences with control and mastery often also occur in the context of the parent–child rela- tionship and so parents’ responsiveness to their children’s needs directly influences their children’s developing sense of mastery (e.g., Chorpita, 2001; Craske & Waters, 2005; Mineka & Zinbarg, 1996, 2006). Unfortunately, parents of anxious children often have an intrusive, overcontrolling parenting style, which may serve only to promote their children’s anxious behaviors by making them think of the world as an unsafe place in which they require protection and have little control themselves (Craske & Waters, 2005).  ThE CENTrAl rOlE OF wOrry AND iTS POSiTiVE FuNCTiONS   The worry process is now considered the central feature of GAD and has been the focus of much research in the past 20 years. Here we will first consider the nature and func- tions of worry. Next, we will consider why worry comes to be such a self-sustaining process in some people and why it may be perceived to be uncontrollable. Borkovec and colleagues (Borkovec, 1994; Borkovec et al., 2004; Behar & Borkovec, 2006) investigated both what people with GAD think the benefits of worrying are and what actual functions worry serves. Several of the benefits that people with GAD most commonly think derive from worrying are:  • Superstitious avoidance of catastrophe (“Worrying makes it  less likely that the feared event will occur”).  • Avoidance of deeper emotional topics (“Worrying about  most of the things I worry about is a way to distract my- self from worrying about even more emotional things, things that I don’t want to think about”).  • Coping and preparation (“Worrying about a predicted nega - tive event helps me to prepare for its occurrence”; Borkovec, 1994, pp. 16–17; Borkovec et al., 2004). There is some evidence that for a subset of people with GAD, these positive beliefs about worry play a key role in maintain- ing high levels of anxiety and worry, especially in early phases
  of the development of GAD (Dugas et al., 2007). In addition, exciting new discoveries about the functions that worry actually serves help reveal why the worry process is so self-sustaining. When people with GAD worry, their emotional and physi- ological responses to aversive imagery are actually suppressed. This suppression of aversive emotional physiological respond- ing may serve to reinforce the process of worry (that is, to increase its probability; Borkovec et al., 2004; McLaughlin et al., 2007). Because worry suppresses physiological respond- ing, it also insulates the person from fully experiencing or processing the topic that she or he is worrying about, and it is known that such full processing is necessary if extinction of that anxiety is to occur. Thus the threatening meaning of the topic being worried about is maintained (Borkovec et al., 2004; Sibrava & Borkovec, 2006).  ThE NEGATiVE CONSEquENCES OF wOrry   In spite of these positive functions that worry serves, some of its effects are clearly negative (Mineka, 2004; Mineka et al., 2002; Newman & Liera, 2011). For example, worry itself is certainly not an enjoyable activ- ity and can actually lead to a greater sense of danger and anxiety (and lower positive mood) because of all the possible catastrophic outcomes that the worrier envisions (McLaughlin et al., 2007). In addition, people who worry about something tend subsequently to have more negative intrusive thoughts than people who do not worry. For example, Wells and Papageorgiou (1995) had people watch a gruesome film. Following the film, some were told to relax and settle down, some were told to imagine the events in the film, and some were told to worry in verbal form about the film. Over the next several days, people in the worry condition showed the most intrusive images from the film. In addition, another study showed that after engaging in worry individuals with GAD experi- ence more intense negative emotions when reacting to a sad film (McLaughlin et al., 2007; see also Newman & Liera, 2011). Finally, there is now considerable evidence that attempts to control thoughts and worry may paradoxically lead to increased experience of intrusive thoughts and enhanced perception of being unable to control them (Abramowitz et al., 2001; Wells, 1999; Wells & Butler, 1997). Somewhat paradoxically, these intrusive thoughts can serve as further trigger topics for more worry, and a sense of uncontrollability over worry may develop in people caught in this cycle that occurs in GAD. As we have noted, perceptions of uncontrollability are also known to be associated with increased anxiety, so a vicious circle of anxiety, worry, and intrusive thoughts may develop (Mineka, 2004; Mineka et al., 2002; Mineka & Zinbarg, 2006).  COGNiTiVE BiASES FOr ThrEATENiNG iNFOrmATiON  Not only do people with GAD have frequent frightening thoughts, they also process threatening information in a biased way, perhaps because they have prominent danger schemas. Many studies have shown that generally anxious people tend to pref- erentially allocate their attention toward threatening cues when both threat and nonthreat cues are present in the environment. Nonanxious people do not show a bias except under limited circumstances, in which they actually may show the opposite bias (see Bar-Haim et al., 2007; MacLeod & Mathews, 2012; Mathews & MacLeod, 2005). Further, this attentional vigilance for threat cues can occur at a very early stage of information pro- cessing, even before the information has entered the person’s con- scious awareness. If a person is already anxious, having her or his attention automatically focused on threat cues in the environment would seem only to maintain the anxiety or even make it worse. Moreover, recent evidence also strongly supports the idea that such attentional biases play a causal role in anxiety as well (e.g., MacLeod et al., 2004; MacLeod & Mathews, 2012; Mathews & MacLeod, 2002). For example, several studies have shown that training nonanxious individuals to show an attentional bias toward threat leads to their showing a greater increase in anxiety in stressful situations (e.g., MacLeod et al., 2002). Conversely, several other studies have shown that training anxious individu- als to attend away from threat leads to a decrease in their anxiety symptom levels (e.g., MacLeod & Mathews, 2012). Generally anxious people are also more likely than nonanx- ious people to think that bad things are likely to happen in the future (A. K. MacLeod, 1999), and they have a much stronger tendency to interpret ambiguous information in a threatening way. For example, when clinically anxious subjects read a series of ambiguous sentences (e.g., “The doctor examined little Emma’s growth” or “They discussed the priest’s convictions”), they are more likely than nonanxious controls to remember the threaten- ing interpretation of each sentence (Eysenck et al., 1991; see also MacLeod et al., 2004; Mathews & MacLeod, 2005; Ouimet et al., 2009). This tendency to interpret ambiguous information nega- tively has actually been shown to increase anxiety in several situa- tions, including watching a stressful video (Wilson et al., 2006). In summary, several psychosocial variables seem to promote the onset of generalized anxiety as well as its maintenance. Experi- ence with unpredictable and/or uncontrollable life events may create a vulnerability to anxiety and promote current anxiety. People also believe that worry serves a number of important func- tions, and it may actually be reinforced because it dampens physi- ological arousal. But worry also has some negative consequences, including the fact that worry begets further worry and creates a sense of perceived uncontrollability over the worry process, which further enhances anxiety. Finally, anxiety is associated with an automatic attentional and interpretive bias toward threatening information.  Biological Causal Factors GENETiC FACTOrS   Although evidence for genetic factors in GAD is mixed, there does seem to be a modest heritabil- ity, although perhaps smaller than that for most other anxiety
disorders except phobias (Hettema, Prescott, & Kendler, et al., 2001; Kendler et al., 1992a). Part of the problem for research in this area has been the evolving nature of our understanding of GAD and what its diagnostic criteria should be. Several large twin studies reveal exactly how heritability estimates vary as a function of one’s definition of GAD (Hettema, Neale, & Kendler, et al., 2001; Kendler et al., 1992a). The largest and most recent of these twin studies using the   DSM-IV-TR   diag- nostic criteria estimate that 15 to 20 percent of the variance in liability to GAD is due to genetic factors. The evidence is increasingly strong that GAD and major depressive disorder have a common underlying genetic predisposi- tion (Kendler, 1996; Kendler et al., 1992d; Kendler et al., 2007). What determines whether individuals with a genetic risk for GAD and/or major depression develop one or the other disorder seems to depend entirely on the specific environmental experiences they have (nonshared environment). At least part of this com- mon genetic predisposition for GAD and major depression is best conceptualized as the basic personality trait commonly known as neuroticism (e.g., Clark, Watson, & Mineka, 1994; Hettema et al., 2004; Kendler et al., 2007).  NEurOTrANSmiTTEr AND NEurOhOrmONAl ABNOrmAliTiES  A Functional Deficiency in GABA   In the 1950s, the benzodiazepine category of medications was found to reduce anxiety. This discovery was followed in the 1970s by the find- ing that these drugs probably exert their effects by stimulating the action of GABA, a neurotransmitter now strongly impli- cated in generalized anxiety (Davis, 2002; LeDoux, 2002; Nutt et al., 2006). It appears that highly anxious people have a kind of functional deficiency in GABA, which ordinarily plays an important role in the way our brain inhibits anxiety in stressful situations. The benzodiazepine drugs appear to reduce anxiety by increasing GABA activity in certain parts of the brain implicated in anxiety, such as the limbic system, and by suppressing the stress hormone cortisol. Whether the functional deficiency in GABA in anxious people causes their anxiety or occurs as a consequence of it is not yet known, but it does appear that this functional deficiency promotes the maintenance of anxiety. More recently, researchers have discovered that another neu- rotransmitter—serotonin—is also involved in modulating gener- alized anxiety (Goodman, 2004; Nutt et al., 2006). At present, it seems that GABA, serotonin, and perhaps norepinephrine all play a role in anxiety, but the ways in which they interact remain largely unknown (LeDoux, 2002).  The Corticotropin-releasing hormone System and Anxiety   An anxiety-producing hormone called corticotropin- releasing hormone (CRH) has also been strongly implicated as playing an important role in generalized anxiety (and depression; Leonardo & Hen, 2006; Maier & Watkins, 2005). When acti- vated by stress or perceived threat, CRH stimulates the release of ACTH (adrenocorticotropic hormone) from the pituitary gland, which in turn causes release of the stress hormone cor- tisol from the adrenal gland (Leonardo & Hen, 2006); cortisol helps the body deal with stress. The CRH hormone may play an important role in generalized anxiety through its effects on the bed nucleus of the   stria terminalis   (an extension of the amygdala; see Figure 6.1), which is now believed to be an important brain area mediating generalized anxiety (e.g., Davis, 2006; Lang et al., 2000).  NEurOBiOlOGiCAl DiFFErENCES BETwEEN ANxiETy AND PANiC   As we noted at the beginning of this chapter, contemporary theorists are drawing several fundamental dis- tinctions between fear, panic, and anxiety, including their neurobiological bases. Fear and panic involve activation of the fight-or-flight response, and the brain areas and neurotrans- mitters that seem most strongly implicated in these emotional responses are the amygdala (and locus coeruleus) and the neurotransmitters norepinephrine and serotonin. General- ized anxiety (or anxious apprehension) is a more diffuse emo- tional state involving arousal and a preparation for possible impending threat; and the brain area, neurotransmitters, and hormones that seem most strongly implicated are the limbic system (especially the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, an extension of the amygdala), GABA, and CRH (Davis, 2006; Lang et al., 2000). Although serotonin may play a role in both anxiety and panic, it probably does so in somewhat different ways. Recently, people with GAD have been found to have a smaller left hippocampal region similar to what is seen with major depression (Hettema et al. 2012); this may represent a common risk factor for the two disorders.  Treatments mEDiCATiONS   Many clients with generalized anxiety disorder consult family physicians, seeking relief from their “nerves” or anx- ieties or their various functional (psychogenic) physical problems. Most often in such cases, medications from the benzodiazepine (anxiolytic) category such as Xanax or Klonopin are used—and misused—for tension relief, reduction of other somatic symptoms, and relaxation. Their effects on worry and other psychological symptoms are not as great. Moreover, they can create physiological and psychological dependence and withdrawal and are therefore difficult to taper. A newer medication called buspirone (from a different medication category) is also effective, and it neither is sedating nor leads to physiological dependence. It also has greater effects on psychic anxiety than do the benzodiazepines. However, it may take 2 to 4 weeks to show results (Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2002, 2007). Several categories of antidepressant medications like those used in the treatment of panic disorder are also useful in the treatment of GAD, and they also seem to have a greater effect on the psychological symptoms of GAD than do the benzodiazepines
  (Goodman, 2004; Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2002, 2007). However, they also take several weeks before their effects are apparent.  COGNiTiVE-BEhAViOrAl TrEATmENT   Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for generalized anxiety disorder has become increas- ingly effective as clinical researchers have refined the techniques used. It usually involves a combination of behavioral techniques, such as training in applied muscle relaxation, and cognitive restruc- turing techniques aimed at reducing distorted cognitions and infor- mation-processing biases associated with GAD as well as reducing catastrophizing about minor events (Barlow, Allen, & Basden, 2007; Borkovec, 2006; Borkovec et al., 2002). GAD ini- tially appeared to be among the most difficult of the anxiety disor- ders to treat, and to some extent this is still true. However, advances have been made, and a quantitative review of many controlled stud- ies showed that CBT approaches resulted in large changes on most symptoms measured (Mitte, 2005). The magnitude of the changes seen with cognitive-behavioral treatment was at least as large as those seen with benzodiazepines, and it led to fewer dropouts (i.e., it was better tolerated). Finally, CBT has also been found to be useful in helping people who have used benzodiazepines for over a year to successfully taper their medications (Gosselin et al., 2006).  CBT for John’s GAD   The case of John, the graduate student with GAD discussed earlier, serves as an example of the success of cognitive-behavioral therapy with this condition. Before receiving cognitive-behavioral therapy, John had seen someone at a student counseling center for several months, but he hadn’t found the “talk therapy” very useful. He had heard that cognitive-behavioral therapy might be useful and had sought such treatment. He was in treatment for about 6 months, during which time he found training in deep muscle relaxation helpful in reducing his overall level of tension. Cognitive restructuring helped reduce his worry levels about all spheres of his life. He still had problems with procrastinating when he had deadlines, but this too was improving. He also began socializing more fre- quently and had tentatively begun dating when treatment ended for financial reasons. He could now see that if a woman didn’t want to go out with him again, this did not mean that he was boring but simply that they might not be a good match.  in review  •   What are the key characteristics of GAD, and what is its typical age of onset?  •   Describe the various psychosocial causal factors that may be involved in GAD, and indicate what functions worry may serve for those with GAD.  •   What are the major biological causal factors in GAD?  •   Compare and contrast the biological and cognitive-behavioral treatments for GAD.  Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders  DSM-5   now includes a new category of disorders called obsessive- compulsive and related disorders. This includes not only OCD but also new (related) disorders such as   hoarding disorder   and excoriation (skin picking) disorder. Also included in this section of  DSM-5   are body dysmorphic disorder and trichotillomania (com- pulsive hair-pulling).  Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder  Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is defined by the occur- rence of unwanted and intrusive obsessive thoughts or distressing images. These are usually accompanied by compulsive behav- iors performed to undo or neutralize the obsessive thoughts or images or as a way of preventing some dreaded event or situation (see the   DSM-5   box for diagnostic criteria). More specifically, according to   DSM-5 ,   obsessions   involve persistent and recur- rent intrusive thoughts, images, or impulses that are experienced as disturbing, inappropriate, and uncontrollable. People who have such obsessions actively try to resist or suppress them or to neutralize them with some other thought or action.   Com- pulsions   can involve either overt repetitive behaviors that are performed as lengthy rituals (such as hand washing, checking, putting things in order over and over again). Compulsions may also involve more covert mental rituals (such as counting, pray- ing, or saying certain words silently over and over again). A person with OCD usually feels driven to perform this compul- sive, ritualistic behavior in response to an obsession, and there are often very rigid rules regarding exactly how the compulsive behavior should be performed. The compulsive behaviors are performed with the goal of preventing or reducing distress or preventing some dreaded event or situation. OCD is often one of the most disabling mental disorders in that it leads to a lower quality of life and a great deal of functional impairment (Stein et al., 2009).   Watch   the   Video   Dave: Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder   on   MyPsychLab . In addition, the person must recognize that the obses- sion is the product of his or her own mind rather than being imposed from without (as might occur in schizophrenia). However, there is a continuum of “insight” among persons with obsessive-compulsive disorder about exactly how senseless and excessive their obsessions and compulsions are (Mathews, 2008; Ruscio et al., 2010). In a minority of cases, this insight is absent most of the time. Most of us have experienced minor obsessive thoughts, such as whether we remembered to lock the door or turn the stove off. In addition, most of us occasionally engage in repetitive or stereotyped behavior, such as checking the stove or the lock on the door or stepping over cracks on a sidewalk. With OCD, however, the thoughts are excessive and much more persistent and distressing, and the associated compulsive
acts interfere considerably with everyday activities. Indeed, the diagnosis requires that obsessions and compulsions must take at least 1 hour in a day, and in severe cases they may take most of the person’s waking hours. Nevertheless, research indicates that normal and abnormal obsessions and compulsive behav- iors exist on a continuum, differing primarily in the frequency and intensity of the obsessions and in the degrees to which the obsessions and compulsions are resisted and are troubling (e.g., Steketee & Barlow, 2002). Indeed, one recent study found that more than 25 percent of people in the NCS-R comorbidity study reported experiencing obsessions or com- pulsions at some time in their lives (Ruscio et al., 2010). Many   obsessive thoughts   involve contamination fears, fears of harming oneself or others, and pathological doubt. Other fairly common themes are concerns about or need for symme- try (e.g., having magazines on a table arranged in a way that is “exactly right”), sexual obsessions, and obsessions concerning religion or aggression. These themes are quite consistent cross- culturally and across the life span (Pallanti, 2009; Steketee & Barlow, 2002). Obsessive thoughts involving themes of violence or aggression might include a wife being obsessed with the idea that she might poison her husband or child, or a daughter constantly imagining pushing her mother down a flight of stairs. Even though such obsessive thoughts are only very rarely acted on, they remain a source of often excruciat- ing torment to a person plagued with them. The following case of Mark is fairly typical of severe obsessive-compulsive disorder.  Obsessions About Confessing and Compulsive Checking   Mark was a 28-year-old single male who, at the time he entered treatment, suffered from severe obsessive thoughts and images about causing harm to others such as running over pedestrians while he was driving. He also had severe obsessions that he would commit a crime such as robbing a store of a large amount of money or poi- soning family members or friends. These obsessions were accompanied by lengthy and excessive checking rituals. For example, one day when he drove, he began obsessing that he had caused an accident and hit a pedestrian at an intersec- tion, and he felt compelled to spend several hours driving and walking around all parts of that intersection to find evi- dence of the accident. At the time Mark went to an anxiety disorder clinic, he was no longer able to live by himself after having lived alone for  A.   Presence of obsessions, compulsions, or both: Obsessions are defined by (1) and (2):  1.   Recurrent and persistent thoughts, urges, or images that are experienced, at some time during the disturbance, as intrusive and unwanted, and that in most individuals cause marked anxiety or distress.  2.   The individual attempts to ignore or suppress such thoughts, urges, or images, or to neutralize them with some other thought or action (i.e., by performing a compulsion). Compulsions are defined by (1) and (2):  1.   Repetitive behaviors (e.g., hand washing, ordering, check- ing) or mental acts (e.g., praying, counting, repeating words silently) that the individual feels driven to perform in response to an obsession or according to rules that must be applied rigidly.  2.   The behaviors or mental acts are aimed at preventing or reducing anxiety or distress, or preventing some dreaded event or situation; however, these behaviors or mental acts are not connected in a realistic way with what they are designed to neutralize or prevent, or are clearly excessive.  Note:   Young children may not be able to articulate the aims of these behaviors or mental acts.  B.   The obsessions or compulsions are time-consuming (e.g., take more than 1 hour per day) or cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  C.   The obsessive-compulsive symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.  D.   The disturbance is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder (e.g., excessive worries, as in general- ized anxiety disorder; preoccupation with appearance, as in body dysmorphic disorder; difficulty discarding or parting with possessions, as in hoarding disorder; hair pulling, as in trichotil- lomania [hair-pulling disorder]; skin picking, as in excoriation [skin-picking] disorder; stereotypies, as in stereotypic movement disorder; ritualized eating behavior, as in eating disorders; pre- occupation with substances or gambling, as in substance-related and addictive disorders; preoccupation with having an illness, as in illness anxiety disorder; sexual urges or fantasies, as in para- philic disorders; impulses, as in disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders; guilty ruminations, as in major depressive disorder; thought insertion or delusional preoccupations, as in schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders; or repeti- tive patterns of behavior, as in autism spectrum disorder). Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder   DSM- 5
  several years since college. He was a very bright young man with considerable artistic talent. He had finished college at a presti- gious school for the arts and had launched a successful career as a young artist when the obsessions began in his early 20s. At first, they were focused on the possibility that he would be implicated in some crime that he had not committed; later, they evolved to the point where he was afraid that he might actually commit a crime and confess to it. The checking rituals and avoid- ance of all places where such confessions might occur eventually led to his having to give up his career and his own apartment and move back in with his family. At the time he presented for treatment, Mark’s obsessions about harming others and confessing to crimes (whether or not he had committed them) were so severe that he had virtually confined himself to his room at his parents’ house. Indeed, he could leave his room only if he had a tape recorder with him so that he would have a record of any crimes he confessed to out loud because he did not trust his own memory. The clinic was several hours’ drive from his home; his mother usually had to drive because of his obsessions about causing accidents with pedestrians or moving vehicles and because the associated checking rituals could punctu- ate any trip with several very long stops. He also could not speak at all on the phone for fear of confessing some crime that he had (or had not) committed, and he could not mail a letter for the same reason. He also could not go into a store alone or into public bathrooms, where he feared he might write a confession on the wall and be caught and punished.  As we have noted, people with OCD feel compelled to per- form acts repeatedly that often seem pointless and absurd even to them and that they in some sense do not want to perform. There are five primary types of compulsive rituals: cleaning (handwashing and showering), repeated checking, repeat- ing, ordering or arranging, and counting (Antony et al., 1998; Mathews, 2009), and many people show multiple kinds of ritu- als. For a smaller number of people, the compulsions are to per- form various everyday acts (such as eating or dressing) extremely slowly (primary obsessional slowness), and for others the com- pulsions are to have things exactly symmetrical or “evened up” (Mathews, 2009; Steketee & Barlow, 2002). Washing or cleaning rituals vary from relatively mild ritual- like behavior such as spending 15 to 20 minutes washing one’s hands after going to the bathroom, to more extreme behavior such as washing one’s hands with disinfectants for hours every day to the point where the hands bleed. Checking rituals also vary in severity from relatively mild (such as checking all the lights, appliances, and locks two or three times before leaving the house) to very extreme (such as going back to an intersection where one thinks one may have run over a pedestrian and spend- ing hours checking for any sign of the imagined accident, much as Mark does in the case study). Both cleaning and checking rituals are often performed a specific number of times and thus also involve repetitive counting. The performance of the com- pulsive act or the ritualized series of acts usually brings a feeling of reduced tension and satisfaction, as well as a sense of control, although this anxiety relief is typically fleeting. This is why the same rituals need to be repeated over and over (e.g., Purdon, 2009; Steketee & Barlow, 2002).  Prevalence, Age of Onset, and Gender Differences  Obsessive-compulsive disorder is more prevalent than it was once thought to be. Specifically, the average 1-year prevalence rate of OCD in the National Comorbidity Survey-Replication  People who suffer from OCD often exhibit re- petitive behaviors that are structured around rigid rules for perfor- mance. For example, this person turns the key in the lock a set number of times every time she leaves the house.  Howard Stern, a famous radio personality and author, as with other people who have suffered from OCD, found re- lief in a compulsive act or ritu- alized series of acts to bring about a feeling of reduced tension as well as a sense of control. In his book   Miss America , Stern describes be- haviors such as turning pages in magazines only with his pinky finger, walking through doors with the right side of his body leading, and flipping through television stations in a particular order before turn- ing the set off.
study was 1.2 percent, and the average lifetime prevalence was 2.3 percent (Ruscio et al., 2010) although lifetime prevalence in other studies has been as high as 3 percent (Kessler et al., 2009). Over 90 percent of treatment-seeking people with OCD experience both obsessions and compulsions (Foa & Kozak, 1995; Franklin & Foa, 2007). When mental rituals and compulsions such as counting are included as compulsive behaviors, this figure jumps to 98 percent. Divorced (or separated) and unemployed people are some- what overrepresented among people with OCD (Karno et al., 1988; Torres et al., 2006). This is not surprising given the great difficulties this disorder creates for interpersonal and occupa- tional functioning. Some studies showed little or no gender difference in adults, which would make OCD quite different from most of the rest of the anxiety disorders. However, one British epidemiological study found a gender ratio of 1.4 to 1 (women to men; Torres et al., 2006). Although the disorder generally begins in late adolescence or early adulthood and is most prevalent then (e.g., average age was 19.5 in the National Comorbidity Survey-Replication study), it is not uncommon in children, where its symptoms are strikingly similar to those of adults (Poulton et al., 2009; Torres et al., 2006). Childhood or early adolescent onset is more common in boys than in girls and is often associated with greater severity (Lomax et al., 2009) and greater heritability (Grisham et al., 2008, for a review). In most cases the disorder has a gradual onset, and once it becomes a serious condition, it tends to be chronic, although the severity of symptoms sometimes wax and wane over time (e.g., Mataix-Cols et al., 2002).  Comorbidity with Other Disorders  Like the anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder fre- quently co-occurs with other mood and anxiety disorders. Depression is especially common, and estimates are that at least 25 to 50 percent of people with OCD may experience major depression at some time in their lives and as many as 80 percent may experience significant depressive symptoms (Steketee & Barlow, 2002; Torres et al., 2006). Given the chronic and debili- tating nature of this disorder, it may not be surprising that many develop depression at least partly in response to having OCD. The disorders with which OCD most often co-occurs include social phobia, panic disorder, GAD, and PTSD (Kessler, Chiu, Demler, et al., 2005c; Mathews, 2009). The personality disorders most commonly found in people with OCD are dependent and avoidant. Another disorder that has been studied extensively only in the past 15 years—body dysmorphic disorder (BDD)—also co-occurs rather commonly with OCD. In one large study, 12 percent of patients with OCD also had body dysmorphic dis- order. Many researchers believe BDD is closely related to OCD (e.g., Phillips, 2000, 2005; Phillips et al., 2007, 2010; Veale & Neziroglu, 2004). Recognizing this, in   DSM-5 , BDD is now grouped with OCD in the obsessive-compulsive and related dis- orders section of the manual.  Psychological Causal Factors OCD AS lEArNED BEhAViOr   The dominant behavioral or learning view of obsessive-compulsive disorder is derived from Mowrer’s two-process theory of avoidance learning (1947). According to this theory, neutral stimuli become associated with frightening thoughts or experiences through classical con- ditioning and come to elicit anxiety. For example, touching a doorknob or shaking hands might become associated with the “scary” idea of contamination. Once having made this associa- tion, the person may discover that the anxiety produced by shaking hands or touching a doorknob can be reduced by hand washing. Washing his or her hands extensively reduces the anx- iety, and so the washing response is reinforced, which makes it more likely to occur again in the future when other situations evoke anxiety about contamination (Rachman & Shafran, 1998). Once learned, such avoidance responses are extremely resistant to extinction (Mineka, 2004; Mineka & Zinbarg, 1996, 2006; Salkovskis & Kirk, 1997). Moreover, any stressors that raise anxiety levels can lead to a heightened frequency of avoidance responses in animals or compulsive rituals in humans (e.g., Cromer et al., 2007). Several classic experiments conducted by Rachman and Hodgson (1980) supported this theory. They found that for most people with OCD, exposure to a situation that provoked  Many of us show some compulsive behavior, but people with obsessive- compulsive disorder feel compelled to perform repeatedly some action in response to an obsession, in order to reduce the anxiety or discomfort created by the obsession. Although the person may realize that the behavior is excessive or unreasonable, he or she does not feel able to control the urge. Obsessive-compulsive hand washers may spend hours a day washing and may even use abrasive cleansers to the point that their hands bleed.
  their obsession (e.g., a doorknob or toilet seat for someone with obsessions about contamination) did indeed produce distress, which would continue for a moderate amount of time and then gradually dissipate. If the person was allowed to engage in the compulsive ritual immediately after the provo- cation, however, her or his anxiety would generally decrease rapidly (although only temporarily) and therefore reinforce the compulsive ritual. This model predicts, then, that exposure to feared objects or situations should be useful in treating OCD if the exposure is followed by prevention of the ritual, enabling the person to see that the anxiety will subside naturally in time without the ritual (see also Rachman & Shafran, 1998). This is indeed the core of the most effective form of behavior therapy for OCD, as discussed later. Thus the early behavioral model has been very useful in helping us understand what factors maintain obsessive-compulsive behavior, and it has also generated an effective form of treatment. However, it has not been so help- ful in explaining why people with OCD develop obsessions in the first place and why some people never develop compulsive behaviors.  OCD AND PrEPArEDNESS   Just as the preparedness concept has us consider specific and social phobias in the evolutionary con- text of fears that may have been adaptive for our early ancestors, we have also enlarged our understanding of obsessive-compulsive disorder by looking at it in an evolutionary context (e.g., De Silva, Rachman, & Seligman, 1977; Rapoport, 1989). For example, thoughts about dirt and contamination associated with compulsive washing are so common as to make their occurrence seem non- random. The overall consensus seems to be that humans’ obses- sions about dirt and contamination and certain other potentially dangerous situations did not arise out of a vacuum but rather have deep evolutionary roots (Mineka & Zinbarg, 1996, 2006). In addition, some theorists have argued that the displace- ment activities that many species of animals engage in under situations of conflict or high arousal resemble the compulsive rituals seen in obsessive-compulsive disorder (Craske, 1999; Mineka & Zinbarg, 1996; Rapoport, 1989; Winslow & Insel, 1991). Displacement activities often involve grooming (such as a bird preening its feathers) or nesting under conditions of high conflict or frustration. They may therefore be related to the distress-induced grooming (such as washing) or tidying rituals seen in people with OCD, which are often provoked by obses- sive thoughts that elicit anxiety.  COGNiTiVE CAuSAl FACTOrS  The Effects of Attempting to Suppress Obsessive Thoughts   When normal people attempt to suppress unwanted thoughts (for example, “Don’t think about white bears”), they may sometimes experience a paradoxical increase in those thoughts later (Abramowitz et al., 2001; Wegner, 1994). As already noted, people with normal and abnormal obsessions differ primarily in the degree to which they resist their own thoughts and find them unacceptable. Thus, one factor contributing to the frequency of obsessive thoughts, and the negative moods with which they are often associated, may be these attempts to sup- press them (similar to what was discussed earlier about the effects of attempts to control worry in people with GAD). For example, when people with OCD were asked to record intrusive thoughts in a diary, both on days when they were told to try to suppress those thoughts and on days without instructions to suppress, they reported approximately twice as many intrusive thoughts on the days when they were attempting to suppress them (Salkovskis & Kirk, 1997). In addition, some other research suggests that thought suppression leads to a more general increase in obsessive- compulsive symptoms beyond just the frequency of obsessions (Purdon, 2004). Finally, using a naturalistic diary study of people with OCD, investigators found that such individuals do indeed engage in frequent, strenuous, and time-consuming attempts to control the intrusive thoughts, although they are generally not effective in doing so (Purdon et al., 2007).  Appraisals of responsibility for intrusive Thoughts  Salkovskis (e.g., 1989), Rachman (1997), and other cognitive theorists have distinguished between obsessive or intrusive thoughts per se and the negative automatic thoughts and cata- strophic appraisals that people have about experiencing such thoughts. For example, people with OCD often seem to have an inflated sense of responsibility. In turn, in some vulnerable people, this inflated sense of responsibility can be associated with beliefs that simply having a thought about doing something (e.g., attack- ing a patient) is morally equivalent to actually having done it (e.g., having attacked a patient), or that thinking about committing a sin increases the chances of actually doing so. This is known as  thought–action fusion   (see Berle & Starcevic, 2005; Rachman et al., 2006; Shafran & Rachman, 2004, for reviews). This inflated sense of responsibility for the harm they may cause adds to the “per- ceived awfulness of any harmful consequences” (Salkovskis et al., 2000, p. 348) and also may motivate compulsive behaviors such as washing and checking to try to reduce the likelihood of anything harmful happening (Rachman et al., 2006). Thus, part of what differentiates normal people who have obsessions and can ordi- narily dismiss them (without a perception of responsibility) from people with OCD is this sense of responsibility that makes the thought so “awful.”  Cognitive Biases and Distortions   Cognitive factors have also been implicated in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Research on people with OCD has shown that their attention is drawn to disturbing material relevant to their obsessive concerns, much as occurs in the other anxiety disorders (see McNally, 2000; Mineka et al., 2003, for reviews). People with OCD also seem to have difficulty blocking out negative, irrelevant input or dis- tracting information, so they may attempt to suppress negative thoughts stimulated by this information (Enright & Beech,
1993a, 1993b; McNally, 2000). As we have noted, trying to suppress negative thoughts may paradoxically increase their fre- quency. These people also have low confidence in their memory ability (especially for situations they feel responsible for), which may contribute to their repeating their ritualistic behaviors over and over again (Cougle et al., 2007; Dar et al., 2000; McNally, 2000). An additional factor contributing to their repetitive behavior is that people with OCD have deficits in their ability to inhibit both motor responses (Morein-Zamir et al., 2010) and irrelevant information (Bannon et al., 2008).  Biological Causal Factors  In the past 25 years there has been a large increase in research investigating the possible biological basis for obsessive-com- pulsive disorder, ranging from studies about its genetic basis to studies of abnormalities in brain function and neurotransmitter abnormalities. The evidence accumulating from all three kinds of studies suggests that biological causal factors are perhaps more strongly implicated in the causes of OCD than for the other disorders discussed in this chapter.  GENETiC FACTOrS   Most genetic studies have been twin studies or family studies. Evidence from twin studies reveals a moderately high concordance rate for monozygotic twins and a lower rate for dizygotic twins. One review of 14 published stud- ies included 80 monozygotic pairs of twins, of whom 54 were concordant for the diagnosis of OCD, and 29 pairs of dizygotic twins, of whom 9 were concordant. This is consistent with a moderate genetic heritability, although it may be at least partially a nonspecific “neurotic” predisposition (Billett, Richter, & Ken- nedy, 1998; Hanna, 2000; see also van Grootheest et al., 2007). Consistent with twin studies, most family studies have found 3 to 12 times higher rates of OCD in first-degree relatives of OCD clients than would be expected from current estimates of the prevalence of OCD (Grabe et al., 2006; Hettema et al., 2001a). Finally, evidence also shows that early-onset OCD has a higher genetic loading than later-onset OCD (Grisham et al., 2008; Mundo et al., 2006). Further compelling evidence of a genetic contribution to some forms of OCD concerns a type of OCD that often starts in childhood and is characterized by chronic motor tics (Lochner & Stein, 2003). This form of tic-related OCD is linked to Tourette’s syndrome, a disorder characterized by severe chronic motor and vocal tics that is known to have a substantial genetic basis (see  5). For example, one study found that 23 percent of first-degree relatives of people with Tourette’s syndrome had diagnosable OCD even though Tourette’s syndrome itself is very rare (Pauls et al., 1986, 1991, 1995). Finally, in recent years a number of molecular genetic stud- ies have begun to examine the association of OCD with specific genetic polymorphisms (naturally occurring variations of genes; e.g., Grisham et al., 2008; Mundo et al., 2006; Stewart et al., 2007). Preliminary findings suggest that different genetic poly- morphisms are implicated in OCD with Tourette’s syndrome and in OCD without Tourette’s syndrome, suggesting that these two forms of OCD are at least partially distinguishable at a genetic level (Stewart et al., 2007).  OCD AND ThE BrAiN   The search for abnormalities in the brain for OCD has been intense in the past 30 years as advances have been made in brain-imaging techniques. Research has found that abnormalities occur primarily in certain cortical structures as well as in certain subcortical structures known as the   basal ganglia.   The basal ganglia are in turn linked at the amygdala to the limbic system, which controls emotional behaviors. Find- ings from a good number of studies using PET scans have shown that people with OCD have abnormally high levels of activity in two parts of the frontal cortex (the orbital frontal cortex and the cingulate cortex/gyrus), which are also linked to the limbic area. People with OCD also have abnormally high levels of activity in the subcortical caudate nucleus, which is part of the basal ganglia (see the three-dimensional depiction of the relevant brain parts in Figure 6.3 on p. 200). These primitive brain circuits are involved in executing primitive patterns of behavior such as those involved in sex, aggression, and hygiene concerns. Indeed, activity in some of these areas is further increased when symptoms are provoked by relevant stimuli that activate obsessive thoughts (e.g., dirt; see Evans , Lewis, & lobst, 2004; Rauch & Savage, 2000, for reviews). Some of these studies have also shown partial normal- ization of at least some of these abnormalities with successful treatment through either medication or behavior therapy (Baxter et al., 2000; Saxena et al., 2002; Saxena et al., 2009). The orbital frontal cortex seems to be where primitive urges regarding sex, aggression, hygiene, and danger come from (the “stuff of obsessions”; Baxter et al., 1991, p. 116). These urges are ordinarily filtered by the caudate nucleus as they travel through the cortico-basal-ganglionic-thalamic circuit, allowing only the stron- gest to pass on to the thalamus. The caudate nucleus or corpus stri- atum (part of the set of structures called the basal ganglia, which are involved in the execution of voluntary, goal-directed move- ments) is part of an important neural circuit linking the orbital frontal cortex to the thalamus. The basal ganglia also include two other structures—the globus pallidus and the substantia nigra— that are also involved in this cortico-basal-ganglionic-thalamic cir- cuit. The thalamus is an important relay station that receives nearly all sensory input and passes it back to the cerebral cortex. This cortico-basal-ganglionic-thalamic circuit is normally involved in the preparation of complex sets of interrelated behav- ioral responses used in specific situations such as those involved in territorial or social concerns. Several theories have been proposed regarding what the sources of dysfunction in this circuit are. For example, Baxter and colleagues (1991, 2000) cite evidence that when this circuit is not functioning properly, inappropriate behavioral responses may occur, including repeated sets of
  behaviors stemming from territorial and social concerns (e.g., checking and aggressive behavior) and from hygiene concerns (e.g., cleaning). Thus the overactivation of the orbital frontal cortex, which stimulates “the stuff of obsessions,” combined with a dysfunctional interaction among the orbital frontal cortex, the corpus striatum or caudate nucleus, and the thalamus (which is downstream from the corpus striatum) may be the central com- ponent of the brain dysfunction in OCD. According to Baxter’s theory, the dysfunctions in this circuit in turn prevent people with OCD from showing the normal inhibition of sensations, thoughts, and behaviors that would occur if the circuit were func- tioning properly. In this case, impulses toward aggression, sex, hygiene, and danger that most people keep under control with relative ease “leak through” as obsessions and distract people with OCD from ordinary goal-directed behavior. Evidence suggests that at least part of the reason that this circuit does not function properly may be due to abnormalities in white matter in some of these brain areas; white matter is involved in connectivity between various brain structures (Szeszko et al., 2004; Yoo et al., 2007). Considering these problems, Baxter and colleagues proposed that we can begin to understand how the prolonged and repeated bouts of obsessive-compulsive behavior in people with OCD may occur (Baxter et al., 1991, 1992, 2000). Several other slightly different theories have also been proposed as to the exact nature or source of the dysfunctions, but there seems to be general agree- ment about most of the brain areas involved (e.g., Friedlander & Desrocher, 2006; Harrison et al., 2009; Saxena & Rauch, 2000).  NEurOTrANSmiTTEr ABNOrmAliTiES   Pharmacologi- cal studies of causal factors in obsessive-compulsive disorder intensified with the discovery in the 1970s that a tricyclic drug called Anafranil (clomipramine) is often effective in the treat- ment of OCD even though other tricyclic antidepressants are generally not very effective (Dougherty et al., 2007). Research shows that this is because clomipramine has greater effects on the neurotransmitter serotonin, which is now strongly implicated in OCD (Pogarell et al., 2003; Stewart et al., 2009). Moreover, sev- eral other antidepressant drugs from the SSRI category that also have relatively selective effects on serotonin, such as fluoxetine (Prozac), have also been shown to be about equally effective in the treatment of OCD (Dougherty, Rauch, et al., 2002, 2007). The exact nature of the dysfunction in serotonergic systems in OCD is unclear (see Gross, et al., 1998; Lambert & Kinsley, 2005). Current evidence suggests that increased serotonin activ- ity and increased sensitivity of some brain structures to serotonin are involved in OCD symptoms. Indeed, drugs that stimulate serotonergic systems lead to a worsening of symptoms. In this view, long-term administration of clomipramine (or fluoxetine) causes a down-regulation of certain serotonin receptors, further causing a functional decrease in availability of serotonin (Dolberg et al., 1996a, 1996b). That is, although the immediate short-term effects of clomipramine or fluoxetine may be to increase serotonin levels (and exacerbate OCD symptoms too), the long-term effects are quite different. This is consistent with the finding that these drugs must be taken for at least 6 to 12 weeks before significant improvement in OCD symptoms occurs (Baxter et al., 2000; Dougherty, Rauch, et al., 2002, 2007). However, it is also becom- ing clear that dysfunction in serotonergic systems cannot by itself fully explain this complex disorder. Other neurotransmitter sys- tems (such as the dopaminergic, GABA, and glutamate systems) also seem to be involved, although their role is not yet well under- stood (Dougherty et al., 2007; Stewart et al., 2009).  Putamen and Globus pallidus Caudate nucleus Cerebral cortex Cingulate gyrus/cortex Frontal cortex Cerebellum   Thalamus   Orbital frontal cortex Corpus callosum Basal Ganglia  figure   6.3  Neurophysiological mechanisms for Obsessive- Compulsive Disorder.   This three-dimensional view il- lustrates parts of the brain implicated in OCD. The overly- ing cerebral cortex has been made transparent so that the underlying areas can be seen. The orbital frontal cortex, cin- gulate cortex/gyrus, and basal ganglia (especially the caudate nucleus) are the brain structures most often implicated in OCD. Increased metabolic activity has been found in each of these three areas in people with OCD.
In summary, there is now a substantial body of evidence implicating biological causal factors in OCD. This evidence comes from genetic studies, from studies of abnormalities in brain function, and from studies of neurotransmitter abnor- malities. Although the exact nature of these factors and how they are interrelated is not yet fully understood, major research efforts that are currently under way are sure to enhance our understanding of this disorder, which is often very serious and disabling.  Treatments BEhAViOrAl AND COGNiTiVE-BEhAViOrAl TrEATmENTS   A behavioral treatment that combines   exposure and response prevention   seems be the most effective approach to treating obsessive-compulsive disorders (e.g., Franklin & Foa, 2002, 2007; Stein et al., 2009). This treatment involves having the OCD clients develop a hierarchy of upsetting stimuli and rate them on a 0 to 100 scale according to their capacity to evoke anxiety, distress, or disgust. Then the clients are asked to expose themselves repeatedly (either in guided fantasy or directly) to stimuli that will provoke their obsession (such as, for someone with compulsive washing rituals, touching the bottom of their shoe or a toilet seat in a public bathroom). Following each expo- sure, they are asked to not engage in the rituals that they ordi- narily would engage in to reduce the anxiety or distress provoked by their obsession. Preventing the rituals is essential so that they can see that if they allow enough time to pass, the anxiety cre- ated by the obsession will dissipate naturally down to at least 40 to 50 on the 100-point scale, even if this takes several hours. In intensive versions of this treatment, clients who, for example, are used to spending 2 to 3 hours a day showering and hand washing may be asked to not shower at all for 3 days at a time (and then only for 10 minutes). Later in treatment they are encouraged to shower for only 10 minutes a day, with no more than five 30-second hand washings at mealtimes, after bathroom use, and after touching clearly soiled objects. In addition to the exposures conducted during therapy sessions, “homework” is liberally assigned. For example, on one occa- sion well into treatment, a therapist drove a patient who was terrified of being contaminated by “dog dirt,” bathroom germs, garbage, and dead animals in the road to a place where she had observed a dead cat on the roadside. The therapist insisted that the patient approach the “smelly” corpse, touch it with the sole of her shoe, and then touch her shoe. A pebble lying close by and a stick with which she had touched the cat were presented to the patient with the instruction that she keep them in her pocket and touch them frequently throughout the day. (See Franklin & Foa, 2008, pp. 192–205). Although some people refuse such treatment or drop out early, it does help a majority of clients who stick with the treat- ment, most of whom show a 50 to 70 percent reduction in symptoms (Abramowitz et al., 2009; Steketee, 1993), as well as improvement in quality of life (Diefenbach et al., 2007). About 50 percent are much improved or very much improved, and another 25 percent are moderately improved; about 76 percent maintain their gains at several-year follow-ups. These results are considered superior to those obtained with medication (Abramowitz et al., 2009; Franklin & Foa, 2008). There is also preliminary evidence that d-cycloserine (the drug known to facilitate extinction of fear) can decrease the number of sessions of exposure and response prevention that are needed, similar to results described earlier for specific pho- bias (Wilhelm et al., 2009). Finally, over the past 20 years a form of cognitive-behavioral therapy has also been developed by Salkovskis and colleagues (e.g., Abramowitz et al., 2009; Salkovskis & Wahl, 2003). Some of the goals were to deter- mine whether it might help a higher percentage of people with OCD, or help increase the degree of symptom improvement, or decrease dropout rates. Current evidence suggests that this form of treatment can also be quite effective, but unfortu- nately it has not been shown to be superior to exposure and response prevention therapy in any of the predicted ways (see Abramowitz et al., 2009; D. A. Clark, 2005, for reviews). Moreover, some researchers have concluded that extinction and response-prevention treatment is probably enhanced by some cognitive therapy (Abramowitz et al., 2009). Given that OCD rarely remits completely, leaving the client with some residual obsessional problems or rituals (Abramowitz et al., 2009; Franklin & Foa, 2007), there is clearly a need to improve further the efficacy of these treatments. The successful use of this exposure and response preven- tion treatment in the case of Mark, the young artist with severe OCD, is described here briefly.  Mark’s Treatment   Mark was initially treated with medication and with exposure and response prevention. He found the side effects of the medication (clomipramine) intolera- ble and gave it up within a few weeks. For the behavioral treat- ment, he was directed to get rid of the tape recorder and was given a series of exercises in which he exposed himself to feared situations where he might confess to a crime or cause harm to others, including making phone calls, mailing letters, and entering stores and public bathrooms (all things he had been unable to do). Checking rituals (including the tape recorder) were pre- vented. Although the initial round of treatment was not especially helpful, in part because of difficulty in getting to treatment, he did eventually make a commitment to more intensive treatment by moving to a small apartment closer to the clinic. Thereafter, he did quite well.  mEDiCATiONS   To date, medications that affect the neu- rotransmitter serotonin seem to be the primary class of medica- tion that has mild to moderate effects in treating persons with
  OCD. The other anxiety and mood disorders respond to a wider range of drugs (Bartz & Hollander, 2007; Dougherty, Baer, et al., 2002; Dougherty, et al., 2007). These medications, such as clomipramine (Anafranil) and fluoxetine (Prozac), which alter functioning of the serotonin system, appear to reduce the inten- sity of the symptoms of this disorder; approximately 40 to 60 percent of OCD clients show at least a 25 to 35 percent reduc- tion in symptoms (relative to 4 to 5 percent on placebo; Dough- erty, et al., 2007; Iancu et al., 2000). Some clients may show greater improvement than this, but about 30 to 50 percent do not show any clinically significant improvement (e.g., Mancebo et al., 2006). In approximately one-third of people who fail to respond to these serotonergic medications, small doses of certain antipsychotic medications may produce significantly greater im- provement (Bloch et al., 2006). A major disadvantage of medication treatment for OCD, as for other anxiety disorders, is that when the medication is discontinued relapse rates are generally very high (as high as 50 to 90 percent; Dougherty et al., 2007; Simpson & Liebowitz, 2006). Thus, many people who do not seek alternative forms of behavior therapy that have more long-lasting benefits may have to stay on these medications indefinitely. Studies in adults have generally not found that combining medication with exposure and response prevention is much more effective than behavior therapy alone (Foa et al., 2005; Franklin & Foa, 2002, 2007), although one large study showed that a combination treatment was superior in the treatment of children and adolescents with OCD (March & Franklin, 2006; Pediatric OCD Treatment Study, 2004). Finally, because OCD in its most severe form is such a crippling and disabling disorder, psychiatrists have begun to reexamine the usefulness of certain neurosurgical techniques for the treatment of severe, intractable OCD (which may afflict as many as 10 percent of people diagnosed with OCD; Mindus, Rasmussen, & Lindquist, 1994). Before such surgery is even contemplated, the person must have had severe OCD for at least 5 years and must not have responded to any of the known treatments discussed so far (medication or behavior therapy). Several studies have shown that approximately 35 to 45 percent of these intractable cases respond quite well (at least a one-third reduction in symptoms) to neurosurgery designed to destroy brain tissue in one of the areas implicated in this condition (Dougherty, Baer, et al., 2002; Jenike, 2000; Rück et al., 2008). However, a significant number of these have adverse side effects. The results of these techniques will be discussed in greater detail in  6.  Body Dysmorphic Disorder  Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD)   was classified as a somatoform disorder in   DSM-IV-TR   because it involves preoccupation with certain aspects of the body. However, because of its very strong similarities with OCD, it was moved out of the somatoform cat- egory and into the OCD and related disorders category in   DSM-5 . People with BDD are obsessed with some   perceived   or   imagined flaw   or flaws in their appearance to the point they firmly believe they are disfigured or ugly (see p. 204 for DSM-5 criteria). This preoccupation is so intense that it causes clinically significant distress and impairment in social or occupational functioning. Although it is not considered necessary for the diagnosis, most people with BDD have compulsive checking behaviors (such as checking their appearance in the mirror excessively or hiding or repairing a perceived flaw). Another very common symptom is avoidance of usual activities because of fear that other people will see the imaginary defect and be repulsed. In severe cases, they may become so isolated that they lock themselves up in their houses and never go out, even to work, with the average employment rate estimated at only about 50 percent (Neziroglu et al., 2004). Not surprisingly, their average quality of life is quite poor (IsHak et al. 2012). Table 6.4 illustrates the range of activities that BDD inter- feres with. People with BDD may focus on almost any body part: their skin has blemishes, their breasts are too small, their face is too thin (or too fat) or disfigured by visible blood vessels that others find repulsive, and so on. One large study found that some of the more common locations for perceived defects include skin (73 percent), hair (56 percent), nose (37 percent), eyes (20 percent), breasts/chest/nipples (21 percent), stomach (22 percent), and face size/shape (12 percent) (Phillips, 2005). Many sufferers have per- ceived defects in more than one body part. It is very important to remember that these are not the ordinary concerns that most of us have about our appearance; they are far more extreme, leading in many cases to complete preoccupation and significant emotional pain. Some researchers estimate that about half the people with BDD have concerns about their appearance that are of delusional intensity (e.g., Allen & Hollander, 2004). It is important to  People with body dysmorphic disorder are preoccupied with perceived defects in certain aspects of their body and frequently spend an inordinate amount of time obses- sively checking their appearance in the mirror.
remember that others do not even see the defects that the person with BDD believes she or he has, or if they do, they see only a very minor defect within the normal range. Another common feature of BDD is that people with this condition frequently seek reassurance from friends and family about their defects, but the reassurances almost never provide more than very temporary relief. They also frequently seek reassurance for themselves by checking their appearance in the mirror countless times in a day (although some avoid mirrors completely). They are usually driven by the hope that they will look different, and sometimes they may think their perceived defect does not look as bad as it has at other times. However, much more commonly they feel worse after mir- ror gazing (Veale & Riley, 2001). They frequently engage in excessive grooming behavior, often trying to camouflage their perceived defect through their hairstyle, clothing, or makeup (Sarwer et al., 2004). The case below illustrates the primary features of this disorder.  The Elephant Man   Chris is a shy, anxious-looking, 31-year-old carpenter who has been hospitalized after making a suicide attempt. . . . He asks to meet with the psychiatrist in a darkened room. He is wearing a baseball cap pulled down over his forehead. Looking down at the floor, Chris says he has no friends, has just been fired from his job, and was recently rejected by his girlfriend. “It’s my nose . . . these huge pockmarks on my nose. They’re grotesque! I look like a monster. I’m as ugly as the Elephant Man! These marks on my nose are all that I can think about. I’ve thought about them every day for the past 15 years, and I think that everyone can see them and that they laugh at me because of them. That’s why I wear this hat all the time. And that’s why I couldn’t talk to you in a bright room . . . you’d see how ugly I am.” The psychiatrist couldn’t see the huge pockmarks that Chris was referring to, even in a brightly lit room. Chris is, in fact, a handsome man with normal-appearing facial pores. [Later Chris says,] “I’ve pretty much kept this preoccupation a secret because it’s so embarrassing. I’m afraid people will think I’m vain. But I’ve told a few people about it, and they’ve tried to convince me that the pores really aren’t visible. . . . This problem has ruined my life. All I can think about is my face. I spend hours a day looking at the marks in the mirror. . . . I started missing more and more work, and I stopped going out with my friends and my girlfriend . . . staying in the house most of the time. . . .” Chris . . . had seen a dermatologist to request dermabra- sion, but was refused the procedure because “there was nothing there.” He finally convinced another dermatologist to do the pro- cedure but thought it did not help. Eventually he felt so desper- ate that he made two suicide attempts. His most recent attempt occurred after he looked in the mirror and was horrified by what he saw ... “I saw how awful I looked, and I thought, I’m not sure it’s worth it to go on living if I have to look like this and think about this all the time.” Source: Adapted with permission from   DSM-IV-TR Casebook: A Learning Companion to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,  text revision, fourth edition (pp. 7–9). Washington, DC. (Copyright © 2002). American Psychiatric Association.  table   6.4  BBD interference in Functioning Problem   Percent of People with BDD who Experienced the Problem  Interference with social functioning (e.g., with friends, family, or intimate relationships) due to BDD 99 Periods of avoidance of nearly all social interactions because of BDD   95 Ever felt depressed because of BDD   94 Interference with work or academic functioning because of BDD   90 Ever thought about suicide because of BDD*   63 Completely housebound for at least 1 week because of BDD   29 Psychiatrically hospitalized at least once because of BDD   26 Ever attempted suicide   25 Ever attempted suicide because of BDD   14 Average Number of Days Missed Days of work missed because of BDD*   52 days Days of school missed because of BDD*   49 days *Since BDD began. Source: Adapted from Katherine A. Phillips.   The Broken Mirror: Understanding and Treating Dysmorphic Disorder . © 2005 Oxford University Press. Reprinted by permission.
  Prevalence, age of onset, and gender differ- ences   Good estimates of the prevalence of BDD are difficult to obtain because of the great secrecy that usually surrounds this disorder. Some leading researchers estimate that it is not a rare disorder, affecting perhaps 1 to 2 percent of the general popula- tion and up to 8 percent of people with depression (e.g., Phillips, 2005; Rief et al., 2006; Buhlmann et al., 2010). The prevalence seems to be approximately equal in men and women, although the primary body parts that are focused on tend to differ in men and women (Phillips, 2005; Phillips & Diaz, 1997). Men are more likely to obsess about their genitals, body build, and bald- ing, whereas women tend to obsess more about their skin, stom- ach, breasts, buttocks, hips, and legs (Phillips, Menard, & Fay, 2006). The age of onset is usually in adolescence, when many people start to become preoccupied with their appearance. Peo- ple with BDD very commonly also have a depressive diagnosis (with most estimates being over 50 percent; Allen & Hollander, 2004), and, as in Chris’s case, it often leads to suicide attempts or completed suicide (Neziroglu et al., 2004; Phillips & Menard, 2006). Indeed, of nearly 200 patients with BDD, Phillips and Menard (2006) found that 80 percent reported a history of sui- cidal ideation, and 28 percent had a history of a suicide attempt. Rates of comorbid social phobia and obsessive-compulsive disorder are also quite substantial, although not as high as for depression (Allen & Hollander, 2004; Coles et al., 2006). Not surprisingly, BDD, like OCD, is often associated with a poor quality of life (IsHak et al., 2012). Sufferers of BDD like Chris commonly make their way into the office of a dermatologist or plastic surgeon, one estimate being that over 75 percent seek nonpsychiatric treat- ment (Phillips et al., 2001). One study found that 8 percent of those seeking cosmetic medical treatments met criteria for BDD (Crerand et al., 2004), although other studies have esti- mated this to be as high as 20 percent (Phillips, 2005). An astute doctor will not do the requested procedures and may instead make a referral to a psychologist or psychiatrist. All too often, though, the patient, like Chris, does get what he or she requests—and unfortunately is almost never satisfied with the outcome. Even if they are satisfied with the outcome, such patients still tend to retain their diagnosis of BDD (Tignol et al., 2007).  relationshiP to ocd and eating disorders   At this point, the similarities to OCD should be fairly obvious. Like people with OCD, those with BDD have prominent obsessions, and they engage in a variety of ritualistic behaviors such as reas- surance seeking, mirror checking, comparing themselves to oth- ers, and camouflage. Moreover, they are even more convinced that their obsessive beliefs are accurate than are people with OCD (Eisen et al., 2003). But in addition to these similarities in symptoms, research is also increasingly suggesting an overlap in causes. For example, the same neurotransmitter (serotonin) and the same sets of brain structures are implicated in the two disorders (Rauch et al., 2003; Saxena & Feusner, 2006), and, as we will discuss later, the same kinds of treatments that work for OCD are also the treatments of choice for BDD (Phillips, 2005). Other researchers have also noted significant overlapping features between BDD and eating disorders (especially anorexia nervosa), the most striking similarity being the body image distortion in both kinds of conditions. Specifically, excessive concerns and preoccupation about physical appearance, dissatis- faction with one’s body, and a distorted image of certain features of one’s body are central to the diagnostic criteria for each (Allen & Hollander, 2004; Cororve & Gleaves, 2001). Nevertheless, it is important to remember that people with BDD look normal and yet are terribly obsessed and distressed about some aspect of their appearance. By contrast, people with anorexia are emaci- ated and generally satisfied with this aspect of their appearance (Phillips, 2005).  Why noW?   BDD has clearly existed for centuries. It also seems to be a universal disorder, occurring in all European countries, the Middle East, China, Japan, and Africa (Phillips, 2005). Why, then, did its examination in the literature begin only recently? One possible reason is that its prevalence may actually have increased in recent years as contemporary Western  a.   Preoccupation with one or more perceived defects or flaws in physical appearance that are not observable or appear slight to others.  B.   At some point during the course of the disorder, the individual has performed repetitive behaviors (e.g., mirror checking, excessive grooming, skin picking, reassurance seeking) or mental acts (e.g., comparing his or her appearance with that of others) in response to the appearance concerns.  c.   The preoccupation causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  d.   The appearance preoccupation is not better explained by con- cerns with body fat or weight in an individual whose symptoms meet diagnostic criteria for an eating disorder. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Body Dysmorphic Disorder   DSM- 5
culture has become increasingly focused on “looks as every- thing,” with billions of dollars spent each year on enhancing appearance through makeup, clothes, plastic surgery, and other means (Fawcett, 2004). A second reason BDD has been under- studied is that most people with this condition never seek psy- chological or psychiatric treatment. Rather, they suffer silently or go to dermatologists or plastic surgeons (Crerand et al., 2004; Phillips, 1996, 2001; Tignol et al., 2007). Reasons for this secrecy and shame include worries that others will think they are superficial, silly, or vain and that if they mention their perceived defect, others will notice it and focus more on it. Part of the reason why more people are now seeking treatment is that starting in the past 15 years the disorder has received a good deal of media attention. It has even been discussed on some daily talk shows, where it is sometimes called “imaginary defect disorder.” As increasing attention is focused on this disor- der, the secrecy and shame often surrounding it should decrease, and more people will seek treatment.  Causal FaCtors: a BiopsyChosoCial approaCh to BDD   Our understanding of what causes BDD is still at a preliminary stage, but recent research seems to suggest that a biopsychosocial approach offers some reasonable hypotheses. First, one recent twin study found that over-concern with a perceived or slight defect in physical appearance is a mod- erately heritable trait (Monzani et al., 2012). Second, BDD seems to be occurring, at least today, in a sociocultural con- text that places great value on attractiveness and beauty, and people who develop BDD often hold attractiveness as their primary value. This means that their self-schemas are heavily focused around such ideas as, “If my appearance is defective, then I am worthless” (endorsed by 60 percent in one study) (Buhlmann & Wilhelm, 2004, p. 924). One possibility why this occurs is that, in many cases, these people were reinforced as children for their overall appearance more than for their be- havior (Neziroglu et al., 2004). Another possibility is that they were teased or criticized for their appearance, which caused conditioning of disgust, shame, or anxiety to their own image of some part of their body. For example, one study of individ- uals with BDD found that 56 to 68 percent reported a history of emotional neglect or emotional abuse, and approximately 30 percent reported a history of physical or sexual abuse or physical neglect (Didie et al., 2006). In addition, substantial empirical evidence now dem- onstrates that people with BDD show biased attention and interpretation of information relating to attractiveness (e.g., Buhlmann & Wilhelm, 2004). They selectively attend to posi- tive or negative words such as   ugly   or   beautiful   more than to other emotional words not related to appearance, and they tend to interpret ambiguous facial expressions as contemptuous or angry more than do controls. When they are shown pictures of their own face that have been manipulated to be more or less symmetrical than in reality, they show a greater discrepancy than controls between judgments of their “actual” face and their “ideal” face. Asked to choose the pictures that best matched their faces, controls’ choices were more symmetrical than their real faces, while patients with BDD lacked this bias (Lambrou et al., 2011). Moreover, several studies that used fMRI technology found that patients with BDD showed fundamental differences in visually processing other people’s faces relative to controls. Specifically, they showed a bias for extracting local, detailed fea- tures rather than the more global or holistic processing of faces seen in controls (Feusner et al., 2007). A second study showed that when patients with BDD are shown a picture of their own face, they demonstrate greater activation than do healthy con- trols in brain regions associated with inhibitory processes and the rigidity of behavior and thinking (the orbitofrontal cortex and the caudate) (Feusner et al., 2010, 2011). Similarly, compared to controls, patients with BDD demonstrate performance deficits on tasks that measure executive functioning (e.g., manipulating information, planning, and organization), which is thought to be guided by prefrontal brain regions (Dunai et al., 2010). Whether or not these factors play a causal role is not yet known, but cer- tainly having such biases and deficits in processing information would, at a minimum, serve to perpetuate the disorder once it has developed.  treatment oF BoDy DysmorphiC DisorDer   As we have already noted, the treatments that are effective for BDD are closely related to those used in the effective treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder. There is some evidence that an- tidepressant medications from the SSRI category often produce moderate improvement in patients with BDD, but many are not helped or show only a modest improvement (Phillips, 2004, 2005; Phillips, Pagano, & Menard, 2006). However, in some cases showing only limited improvement, it is possible that inadequate doses of the medication were used, thus leading to an underestimation of their true potential effects. In general, it seems that higher doses of these medications are needed to effectively treat BDD relative to OCD (Hadley et al., 2006). In addition, a form of cognitive-behavioral treatment emphasizing exposure and response prevention has been shown to produce marked improvement in 50 to 80 percent of treated patients (Sarwer et al., 2004; Simon, 2002; Williams et al., 2006). These treatment approaches focus on getting the patient to identify and change distorted perceptions of his or her body during exposure to anxiety-provoking situations (e.g., when wearing something that highlights rather than disguises the “defect”) and on pre- vention of checking responses (e.g., mirror checking, reassur- ance seeking, and repeated examining of the imaginary defect). The treatment gains are generally well maintained at follow-up (Looper & Kirmayer, 2002; Sarwer et al., 2004).
  hoarding Disorder  Compulsive hoarding is a fascinating condition that had received very little research attention until the past 15–20 years. However, it has been brought into public awareness recently through several TV series such as A&E’s   Hoarders  or TLC’s   Hoarding: Buried Alive . Traditionally, hoarding was thought of as one particular symptom of OCD, but this cat- egorization began to be seriously questioned (e.g., Mataix-Cols et al., 2010). Reflecting this evolution of thinking, hoarding has now been added as a new disorder in   DSM-5 . Compul- sive hoarding (as a symptom) occurs in approximately 10 to 40 percent of people diagnosed with OCD (Mataix-Cols, 2010; Steketee & Frost, 2004). However, as many as 4 out of 5 people show only compulsive hoarding (Tolin et al., 2008), and some studies have estimated its prevalence at 3 to 5 percent of the adult population. Such individuals both acquire and fail to discard many possessions that seem useless or of very lim- ited value, in part because of the emotional attachment they develop to their possessions. In addition, their living spaces are extremely cluttered and disorganized to the point of interfer- ing with normal activities that would otherwise occur in those spaces, such as cleaning, cooking, and walking through the house. In severe cases people have literally been buried alive in their own home by their hoarded possessions. Part of the reason compulsive hoarding has become a focus of significant research attention stems from the realiza- tion that, on average, compulsive hoarders are significantly more disabled (both occupationally and socially) than people with OCD but without compulsive hoarding symptoms (Mataix-Cols et al., 2010; Pertusa et al., 2010). They are also at high risk for fire, falling, poor sanitation, and serious health problems (Saxena et al., 2011; Steketee & Frost, 2004). In addition, these individuals have a poorer prognosis for treatment than do people without hoarding symptoms. Early studies found that the medications typically used to treat OCD were generally not effective in treating people with compulsive hoarding symptoms, although some studies have suggested that one antidepressant can be somewhat effective (Saxena, 2007). Traditional behavioral therapy using exposure and response prevention is also less effective than for tradi- tional OCD (Saxena, 2007), although there are some promising, new intensive and prolonged behavioral treatments that include home visits, which seem to be more effective (e.g., Tolin et al., 2007, 2008). Recent neuroimaging research has found that people diagnosed with OCD who have compulsive hoarding symptoms also show patterns of activation in certain brain areas when their symptoms are provoked. These brain activation patterns are different from those of people diagnosed with OCD who do not have hoarding symptoms (Mataix-Cols et al., 2004, 2010; Pertusa et al., 2010). This has led some to suggest that people with compulsive hoarding may be neurologically distinct from people with OCD (Mataix-Cols et al., 2010; Saxena, 2008). This conclusion would also be consistent with some findings of a relative lack of responsiveness to the same medications that are often successful in reducing the severity of other forms of OCD and with recent findings that different genes seem to be implicated in OCD without hoarding versus OCD with hoarding (Pertusa et al., 2010; Samuels, Shugart, et al., 2007).  Trichotillomania  Trichotillomania   (also known as compulsive hair pulling) has as its primary symptom the urge to pull out one’s hair from any- where on the body (most often the scalp, eyebrows, or arms), resulting in noticeable hair loss. In earlier editions of the   DSM , trichotillomania was categorized as an impulse-control disorder. However, reflecting its relationship to OCD, in   DSM-5   it is now placed in the obsessive-compulsive and related disorders category. The hair pulling is usually preceded by an increasing sense of tension, followed by pleasure, gratification or relief when the hair is pulled out. The symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in some important areas of functioning. It usually occurs when the person is alone (or with immediate family members) and the person often examines the hair root, twirls it off and sometimes pulls the strand between their teeth and/or eats it. The onset can be in childhood or later, with onset post-puberty being associated with a more severe course (Odlaug et al. 2012). Research on trichotillomania is in very early stages and much remains to be learned about this condition (see Grant et al., 2012).  in review  •   Summarize the major symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder.  •   How have conditioning and cognitive factors been implicated in OCD?  •   What are the major biological causal factors for OCD?  •   What are the primary symptoms of body dysmorphic disorder, and how are they related to obsessive-compulsive disorder?  •   What are the primary symptoms of hoarding disorder and why is it often so debilitating?  •   What are the primary symptoms of trichotillomania?  Cultural Perspectives  Cross-cultural research suggests that although anxiety is a univer- sal emotion, and anxiety disorders probably exist in all human societies, there are some differences in prevalence and in the form in which the different disorders are expressed in different
cultures (Barlow, 2002; Good & Kleinman, 1985; Kirmayer et al., 1995). Within the United States, lifetime prevalence rates of several anxiety disorders vary in somewhat surprising ways across different racial and ethnic groups, including non-Hispanic whites, African Americans, and Hispanic Americans (Breslau et al., 2006). Specifically, results from the National Comor- bidity Survey-Replication study showed that lifetime risk for social phobia, generalized anxiety disorder, and panic disorder is somewhat lower among the two minority groups than among the non-Hispanic whites. These differences were slightly larger for people under age 45 and from lower socioeconomic classes. However, once a disorder has developed, the disorders are equally persistent across the three groups. Latin Americans from the Caribbean (especially those from Puerto Rico), and other people from the Caribbean, do show higher rates of a variant of panic disorder called   ataque de nervios   (Guarnaccia et al., 2010; Hinton et al., 2008; Hinton, Lewis-Fernandez, Pollack, et al., 2009) than do other groups. Most of the symptoms of ataque de nervios are the same as in a panic attack, but they may also include bursting into tears, anger, and uncontrollable shouting. Other symptoms can include shakiness, verbal or physical aggression, dissociative experiences, and seizure-like or fainting episodes. Such attacks are often associated with a stressful event relating to the family (e.g., news of a death), and the person may have amnesia for the episode. At least in Puerto Rico this disorder is quite common in children and adolescents as well, affecting about 9 percent (Guarnaccia et al., 2005). Individuals who experience ataque de nervios also seem to be vulnerable to a wider range of other anxiety and mood disorders (Guarnaccia et al., 2010). Looking at anxiety disorders from a cross-national perspective, one very large study of over 60,000 people across 14 countries (8 developed and 6 less developed) by the World Health Organi- zation (WHO World Mental Health Survey Consortium, 2004) showed that anxiety disorders were the most common category of disorder reported in all but one country (Ukraine). However, reported prevalence rates for all the anxiety disorders combined varied from 2.4 percent (Shanghai, China) to 18.2 percent (United States). Other countries with moderately high rates of reported anxiety disorders were Colombia, France, and Lebanon, and other countries with moderately low rates were China, Japan, Nigeria, and Spain. We now turn to several examples of cultural variants on anxiety disorders that illustrate the range of expressions of anxiety that are exhibited worldwide.  Cultural Differences in Sources of worry  In the Yoruba culture of Nigeria, there are three primary clusters of symptoms associated with generalized anxiety: worry, dreams, and bodily complaints. However, the sources of worry are very different than those in Western society; they focus on creating and maintaining a large family and on fertility. Dreams are a major source of anxiety because they are thought to indicate that one may be bewitched. The common somatic complaints are also unusual from a Western standpoint: “I have the feeling of something like water in my brain,” “Things like ants keep on creeping in various parts of my brain,” and “I am convinced some types of worms are in my head” (Ebigbo, 1982; Good & Kleinman, 1985). Nigerians with this syndrome often have par- anoid fears of malevolent attack by witchcraft (Kirmayer et al., 1995). In India also there are many more worries about being possessed by spirits and about sexual inadequacy than are seen in generalized anxiety in Western cultures (Carstairs & Kapur, 1976; Good & Kleinman, 1985). Another culture-related syndrome that occurs in places like China and other Southeast Asian countries is   Koro , which for men involves intense, acute fear that the penis is retracting into the body and that when this process is complete the sufferer will die. Koro occurs less frequently in women, for whom the fear is that their nipples are retracting and their breasts shrinking. Koro tends to occur in epidemics (sometimes referred to as a form of mass hysteria; Sinha, 2011)—especially in cultural minority groups when their survival is threatened—and it is often attributed to either malicious spirits or contaminated food. A variant on this syndrome also occurs in West African nations, where afflicted individuals report shrinking of the penis or breasts (but not retrac- tion), which they fear will lead to loss of sexual functioning and reproductive capacity (but not death). Frequently, another person who was present at the time is blamed and often severely beaten or otherwise punished (Dzokoto & Adams, 2005). They both occur in a cultural context where there are serious concerns about male sexual potency (Barlow, 2002; Kirmayer et al., 1995).  Taijin Kyofusho  There is also some evidence that the form that certain anxi- ety disorders take has actually evolved to fit certain cultural patterns (e.g., Hinton et al., 2009). A good example is the Japanese disorder   taijin kyofusho , which is related to the Western diagnosis of social phobia. Like social phobia, it is a fear of interpersonal relations or of social situations (Kim et al., 2008; Kirmayer, 1991; Kleinknecht et al., 1997). However, Westerners with social phobia are afraid of social situations where they may be the object of scrutiny or criti- cism. By contrast, most people with taijin kyofusho are con- cerned about doing something that will embarrass or offend others (Kim et al., 2008). For example, they may fear offend- ing others by blushing, emitting an offensive odor, staring inappropriately into the eyes of another person, or through their perceived physical defects or imagined deformities (which can reach delusional levels; (Kim et al., 2008). This fear of bringing shame on others or offending them is what leads to social avoidance (Kleinknecht et al., 1997). Body dysmorphic disorder, described earlier, also commonly occurs
in sufferers of taijin kyofusho (Nagata, van Vliet, et al., 2006). Kirmayer (1991) and colleagues (1995) have argued that the pattern of symptoms that occurs in taijin kyofusho has clearly been shaped by cultural factors. Japanese children are raised to be highly dependent on their mothers and to have a fear of the outside world, especially strangers. As babies and young children, they are praised for being obedient and docile. There is also a great deal of emphasis on implicit communication—being able to guess another’s thoughts and feelings and being sensitive to them. People who make too much eye contact are likely to be considered aggressive and insensitive, and children are taught to look at the throat of people with whom they are conversing rather than into their eyes. The society is also very hierarchical and structured, and many subtleties in language and facial com- munication are used to communicate one’s response to social status. At a more general level, cross-cultural researchers have noted that recognition of the cognitive component of most anxiety dis- orders leads one to expect many cross-cultural variations in the form that different anxiety disorders take. Anxiety disorders can be considered, at least in part, disorders of the interpretive pro- cess. Because cultures influence the categories and schemas that we use to interpret our symptoms of distress, there are bound to be significant differences in the form that anxiety disorders take in different cultures (e.g., Barlow, 2002; Good & Kleinman, 1985; Kirmayer et al., 1995).  in review  •   What are some examples of cultural differences in sources of worry?  •   How is taijin kyofusho related to social phobia, and what kinds of cultural forces seem to have shaped it?  UNReSoLveD issues  The Choice of Treatments: Medications or Cognitive-Behavior Therapy?  M any people with anxiety or obsessive-compulsive disorders are unaware of the treatment options that are available to them. They also know little about the pros and cons of different types of treatment. Many men- tal health professionals are similarly uninformed or lack the training to conduct some of the more specialized treatments. For these reasons they may not recommend referral to what could be a more effective form of treatment. For example, in the United States specialized training in exposure and response prevention treatment for OCD is often not given to therapists in training. Many graduate programs in clinical psychology are also not very scientifically based (see Baker et al., 2008). Some people prefer treatment with medications because they believe it is easier to take pills than to engage in cognitive-behavior therapy (which might be more costly or involve homework assignments). On the other hand, therapy (unlike medications) does not typically lead to unpleasant side effects other than briefly elicited fear or anxiety. Over the longer-term, therapy can also be more cost-effective because people treated with medications routinely stay on them indefinitely but therapy usually has very long-lasting ef- fects that do not wear off with time. Medications sometimes also have limited effectiveness relative to the treatment effects that are seen with properly-administered cognitive- behavior therapy. But finding a well trained cognitive behavior therapist is far from easy. And even trained therapists are frequently limited in the range of disorders they have been trained to treat. One solution is to provide therapists in training with proficiency in treating a broader range of disorders. The Association for Psychological Science (APS) is trying to improve this situation by develop- ing a new system for accrediting clinical training programs that teach their students well-validated forms of effective treatments. Although progress is being made, the pace of change is much slower than would be desirable.
6.1   what are the essential features of anxiety disorders?  •   The anxiety disorders have anxiety or panic or both at their core. They were initially considered a subset of the neuroses, but this term was largely abandoned after   DSM-III .  •   Fear or panic is a basic emotion that involves activation of the fight-or-flight response of the autonomic nervous system; it occurs in response to imminent danger.  •   Anxiety is a more diffuse blend of emotions that includes high levels of negative affect, worry about possible threat or danger, and the sense of being unable to predict threat or to control it if it occurs.  6.2   what are the different types of phobias?  •   With   specific phobias , there is an intense and irrational fear of spe- cific objects or situations that leads to a great deal of avoidance behavior; when confronted with a feared object, the phobic person often shows activation of the fight-or-flight response, which is also associated with panic.  •   In   social phobia , a person has disabling fears of one or more social situations, usually because of fears of negative evaluation by others or of acting in an embarrassing or humiliating manner; in some cases a person with social phobia may actually experience panic attacks in social situations.  •   People with social phobia also have prominent perceptions of unpredictability and uncontrollability and are preoccupied with negative self-evaluative thoughts that tend to interfere with their ability to interact in a socially skillful fashion.  6.3   why do anxiety disorders develop?  •   Many sources of fear and anxiety are believed to be acquired through conditioning or other learning mechanisms. However, some people (because of either temperamental or experien- tial factors) are more vulnerable than others to acquiring such responses.  •   We seem to have an evolutionarily based preparedness to acquire readily fears of objects or situations that posed a threat to our early ancestors.  6.4   what are the clinical features of Panic Disorder?  •   In   panic disorder , a person experiences recurrent, unexpected panic attacks that often create a sense of stark terror and numer- ous other physical symptoms of the fight-or-flight response; panic attacks usually subside in a matter of minutes.  •   Many people who experience panic attacks develop anxious apprehension about experiencing another attack; this apprehen- sion is required for a diagnosis of panic disorder.  •   Many people with panic disorder also develop agoraphobic avoidance of situations in which they fear that they might have an attack.  6.5   what factors are implicated in the development of panic disorder?  •   Biological theories of panic disorder emphasize that the disorder may result from biochemical abnormalities in the brain as well as abnormal activity of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine and serotonin.  •   Panic attacks may arise primarily from the brain area called the amygdala, although many other areas are also involved in panic disorder.  •   The learning theory of panic disorder proposes that panic attacks cause the conditioning of anxiety primarily to external cues associ- ated with the attacks and conditioning of panic itself primarily to interoceptive cues associated with the early stages of the attacks.  •   The cognitive theory of panic disorder holds that this condition may develop in people who are prone to making catastrophic mis- interpretations of their bodily sensations, a tendency that may be related to preexisting high levels of anxiety sensitivity.  6.6   Describe the clinical aspects of Generalized Anxiety Disorder.  •   In   generalized anxiety disorder , a person has chronic and excessively high levels of worry about a number of events or activities and responds to stress with high levels of psychic and muscle tension.  •   Generalized anxiety disorder may occur in people who have had extensive experience with unpredictable or uncontrollable life events.  •   People with generalized anxiety seem to have danger schemas about their inability to cope with strange and dangerous situations that promote worries focused on possible future threats.  •   The neurobiological factor most implicated in generalized anxiety is a functional deficiency in the neurotransmitter GABA, which is involved in inhibiting anxiety in stressful situations; the limbic sys- tem is the brain area most involved.  6.7   how are anxiety disorders treated?  •   Once a person has an anxiety disorder, mood-congruent infor- mation processing, such as attentional and interpretive biases, seems to help maintain it. This explains why, without treat- ment, anxiety disorders are often chronic conditions.  •   Many people with anxiety disorders are treated by physicians, often with medications designed to allay anxiety or with anti- depressant medications that also have antianxiety effects when taken for at least 3 to 4 weeks. Such treatment focuses on sup- pressing the symptoms, and some anxiolytic medications have the potential to cause physiological dependence. Once the medications are discontinued, relapse rates tend to be high.  •   Behavioral and cognitive therapies have a very good track record with regard to treatment of the anxiety disorders. A key ingredient of effective treatment is prolonged exposure to feared situations.  •   Cognitive therapies focus on helping clients understand their underlying automatic thoughts, which often involve cognitive distortions such as unrealistic predictions of catastrophes that in reality are very unlikely to occur. Then they learn to change  6   summary
these inner thoughts and beliefs through a process of logical reanalysis known as cognitive restructuring.  6.8   what are the clinical features of obsessive-compulsive disorder and how is this disorder treated?  •   In   obsessive-compulsive disorder , a person experiences unwanted and intrusive distressing thoughts or images that are usually accompanied by compulsive behaviors performed to neutralize those thoughts or images. Checking and cleaning rituals are most common.  •   Biological causal factors are also involved in obsessive-compul- sive disorder, with evidence coming from genetic studies, stud- ies of brain functioning, and psychopharmacological studies.  •   Once this disorder begins, the anxiety-reducing qualities of the compulsive behaviors may help to maintain the disorder.  •   Behavior therapies that involve exposure are effective in the treatment of OCD. Rituals must also must be prevented fol- lowing exposure to the feared situations.  6.9   Describe three obsessive-compulsive related disorders.  •   People with of BDD are obsessed with some   perceived   or   imag- ined flaw   or flaws in their appearance to the point they firmly believe they are disfigured or ugly. This preoccupation is so intense that it causes clinically significant distress and impair- ment in social or occupational functioning.  •   Compulsive hoarders acquire and fail to discard many pos- sessions that seem useless or of very limited value, in part because of the emotional attachment they develop to their possessions. Compulsive hoarders are significantly more dis- abled than people with OCD without compulsive hoarding symptoms.  •   Trichotillomania (also known as compulsive hair pulling) has as its primary symptom the urge to pull out one’s hair from anywhere on the body (most often the scalp, eyebrows, or arms), resulting in noticeable hair loss.  key terms  agoraphobia   179  amygdala   182  anxiety   163  anxiety disorders   165  anxiety sensitivity   186  blood-injection-injury phobia   168  body dysmorphic disorder (BDD)   202  cognitive restructuring   177  compulsions   194  exposure and response prevention   201  exposure therapy   171  exteroceptive conditioning   184  fear   163  generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)   188  hoarding disorder   194  interoceptive conditioning   184  neurotic disorders   163  obsessions   163  obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)   163  obsessive-compulsive spectrum disorders   164  panic attack   164  panic disorder   178  panic provocation procedures   183  phobia   166  prepared learning   171  social phobia   173  specific phobia   166  trichotillomania   206
learning objectives  7.1  What are mood disorders?  7.2  What symptoms are characteristic of depressive disorders?  7.3  What are the causal factors in unipolar mood disorders?  7.4  What are bipolar disorders?  7.5  What are the causal factors in bipolar disorder?  7.6  What are the treatments and outcomes for mood disorders?  7.7  What is the clinical picture and the causal pattern of suicide?  7.8  What role does ambivalence play in thoughts of suicide?  7.9  How can suicide be prevented?  A Successful “Total Failure”   Margaret, a prominent businesswoman in her late 40s noted for her energy and produc- tivity, was unexpectedly deserted by her husband for a younger woman. Following her initial shock and rage, she began to have uncontrollable weeping spells and doubts about her business acumen. Decision making became an ordeal. Her spirits rapidly sank, and she began to spend more and more time in bed, refus- ing to deal with anyone. Her alcohol consumption increased to the point where she was seldom entirely sober. Within a period of weeks, she had suffered serious financial losses owing to her inability, or refusal, to keep her affairs in order. She felt she was a “total failure,” even when reminded of her considerable personal and professional achievements; indeed, her self-criticism gradu- ally spread to all aspects of her life and her personal history. Finally, alarmed members of her family essentially forced her to accept an appointment with a clinical psychologist. Was something “wrong” with Margaret, or was she merely experiencing normal human emotions because of her husband having deserted her? The psychologist concluded that she was suffering from a serious mood disorder and initiated treat- ment. The diagnosis, based on the severity of the symptoms and the degree of impairment, was major depressive disorder. Secondarily, she had also developed a serious drinking prob- lem—a condition that frequently co-occurs with major depressive disorder.  Most of us feel depressed from time to time. Failing an exam, arguing with a friend, not being accepted into one’s first choice of college or graduate school, and breaking up with a romantic partner are all examples of events that can precipitate a depressed mood in many people. However,   mood disorders   involve much more severe alterations in mood for much longer periods of time. In such cases the disturbances of mood are intense and persistent enough to be clearly maladaptive and often lead to serious prob- lems in relationships and work performance. Mood disorders are diverse in nature, as is illustrated by the many types of depression recognized in the   DSM-5   that we will discuss. Nevertheless, in all mood disorders (formerly called   affec- tive disorders ), extremes of emotion or   affect —soaring elation or deep depression—dominate the clinical picture. Other symptoms are also present, but the abnormal mood is the defining feature.  Mood Disorders: An Overview  The two key moods involved in mood disorders are   mania , often characterized by intense and unrealistic feelings of excite- ment and euphoria, and   depression , which usually involves feelings of extraordinary sadness and dejection. Some people with mood disorders experience only time periods or episodes characterized by depressed moods. However, other people experience manic episodes at certain time points and depressive episodes at other time points. Normal mood states can occur between both types of episodes. Manic and depressive mood states are often conceived to be at opposite ends of a mood continuum, with normal mood in the middle. Although this concept is accurate to a degree, sometimes an individual may have symptoms of mania and depression during the same time period. In these   mixed-episode   cases, the person experiences rapidly alternating moods such as sadness, euphoria, and irritability, all within the same episode of illness.  Types of Mood Disorders  We will first discuss the   unipolar depressive disorders , in which the person experiences only depressive episodes, and then discuss the   bipolar and related disorders , in which the person experiences both manic and depressive episodes. The most common form of mood disturbance involves depression. To be diagnosed with major depressive disorder, a person must be markedly depressed or lose interest in formerly pleasurable activities (or both) for at least two weeks. Other symptoms such as changes in sleep or appetite, or feelings of  7
worthlessness must also be present (see the   DSM-5   box for diagnostic criteria). The other primary kind of mood episode is a   manic epi- sode , in which the person shows a markedly elevated, euphoric, or expansive mood, often interrupted by occasional outbursts of intense irritability or even violence—particularly when others refuse to go along with the manic person’s wishes and schemes. These extreme moods must persist for at least a week for this diagnosis to be made. In addition, three or more additional symptoms must occur in the same time period, ranging from behavioral symptoms (such as a notable increase in goal-directed activity, to mental symptoms where self-esteem becomes grossly inflated and mental activity may speed up (such as a “flight of ideas” or “racing thoughts”), to physical symptoms (such as a decreased need for sleep or psychomotor agitation). (See the  DSM-5   box “Criteria for Manic Episode.”) In milder forms, similar kinds of symptoms can lead to a diagnosis of   hypomanic episode , in which a person experiences abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood for at least 4 days. In addition, the person must have at least three other symptoms similar to those involved in mania but to a lesser degree (e.g., inflated self-esteem, decreased need for sleep, flights of ideas, pressured speech, etc.). Although the symptoms listed are the same for manic and hypomanic episodes, there is much less impairment in social and occupational functioning in hypo- mania, and hospitalization is not required.  A.   Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-week period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.  Note:   Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to another medical condition.  1.   Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indi- cated by either subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g., appears tearful). ( Note:   In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.)  2.   Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of the day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or observation).  3.   Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of more than 5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite nearly every day. ( Note:   In children, consider failure to make expected weight gain.)  4.   Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.  5.   Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others; not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).  6.   Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.  7.   Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropri- ate guilt (which may be delusional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick).  8.   Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisive- ness, nearly every day (either by subjective account or as observed by others).  9.   Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recur- rent suicidal ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide.  B.   The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impair- ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of func- tioning.  C.   The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition.  Note:   Criteria A–C constitute a major depressive episode. Major depressive episodes are common in bipolar I disorder but are not required for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.  Note:   Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, finan- cial ruin, losses from a natural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may include the feelings of intense sadness, rumi- nation about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss noted in Criterion A, which may resemble a depressive episode. Although such symptoms may be understandable or considered appropriate to the loss, the presence of a major depressive episode in addition to the normal response to a significant loss should also be carefully considered. This decision inevitably requires the exercise of clinical judgment based on the individu- al’s history and the cultural norms for the expression of distress in the context of loss.  D.   The occurrence of the major depressive episode is not better explained by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizo- phreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.  E.   There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode.  Note:   This exclusion does not apply if all of the manic-like or hypomanic-like episodes are substance-induced or are attributable to the physiological effects of another medical condition.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor- ders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Major Depressive Disorder   DSM- 5
The Prevalence of Mood Disorders  Major mood disorders occur with alarming frequency—at least 15 to 20 times more frequently than schizophrenia, for example, and at almost the same rate as all the anxiety disorders taken together. Of the two types of serious mood disorders,   major depressive disorder   (MDD), in which only   major depressive episodes   occur (also known as   unipolar   major depression), is the most common, and its occurrence has apparently increased in recent decades (Kaelber et al., 1995; Kessler et al., 2003). The most recent epidemiological results from the National Comorbid- ity Survey-Replication (NCS-R) found lifetime prevalence rates of unipolar major depression at nearly 17 percent (12-month preva- lence rates were nearly 7 percent; Kessler, Chiu et al., 2005). Moreover, rates for unipolar major depression are always much higher for women than for men (usually about 2:1), similar to the sex differences for most anxiety disorders (see Chapter 6) (Hasin et al., 2005; Nolen-Hoeksema & Hilt, 2009; Nolen- Hoeksema, 2012). These differences occur in most countries around the world; the few exceptions are developing and rural countries such as Nigeria and Iran. In the United States, this sex difference starts in adolescence and continues until about age 65, when it seems to disappear. Yet among school children, boys are equally likely or slightly more likely to be diagnosed with depression. The other type of major mood disorder,   bipolar disorder   (in which both manic and depressive episodes occur), is much less common. The NCS-R estimated that the lifetime risk of devel- oping the classic form of this disorder is about 1 percent (see also Goodwin & Jamison, 2007), and there is no discernible differ- ence in the prevalence rates between the sexes.  in review  •   What are the primary distinctions between depressive disorders and bipolar disorders?  •   How prevalent are the two types of mood disorders?  •   How do the prevalence rates of depressive and bipolar disorders differ between the sexes?  Unipolar Depressive Disorders  Sadness, discouragement, pessimism, and hopelessness about matters improving are familiar feelings to most people. Feelings of depression are unpleasant when we are experiencing them, but they usually do not last long, dissipating on their own after a period of days or weeks or after they have reached a certain intensity level. Indeed, mild and brief depression may actually be “normal” and adaptive in the long run. By slowing us down, mild depression sometimes saves us from wasting a lot of energy  A.   A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and abnormally and persistently increased goal-directed activity or energy, lasting at least 1 week and present most of the day, nearly every day (or any duration if hospitalization is necessary).  B.   During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy or activity, three (or more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood is only irritable) are present to a significant degree and represent a noticeable change from usual behavior:  1.   Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.  2.   Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).  3.   More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.  4.   Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.  5.   Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimport- ant or irrelevant external stimuli), as reported or observed.  6.   Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or sexually) or psychomotor agitation (i.e., purpose- less non-goal-directed activity).  7.   Excessive involvement in activities that have a high poten- tial for painful consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or foolish business investments).  C.   The mood disturbance is sufficiently severe to cause marked impairment in social or occupational functioning or to neces- sitate hospitalization to prevent harm to self or others, or there are psychotic features.  D.   The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, other treat- ment) or to another medical condition.  Note:   A full manic episode that emerges during antidepres- sant treatment (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level beyond the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a manic episode and, therefore, a bipolar I diagnosis.  Note:   Criteria A–D constitute a manic episode. At least one lifetime manic episode is required for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor- ders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Manic Episode   DSM-5
in the futile pursuit of unobtainable goals (Keller & Nesse, 2005; Nesse, 2000). Usually, normal depressions would be expected to occur in people undergoing painful but common life events such as significant personal, interpersonal, or economic losses.  Other Forms of Depression  Depressions are nearly always the result of recent stress. In the next sections we consider routine life situations that are commonly associated with depressive symptoms. Not all of these depressions will be severe enough to be considered as mood disorders. In most cases, symptoms are short-term and time limited. However, when severe symptoms are experienced for an extended period of time, the diagnosis will be one of mood disorder.  LOSS AND ThE GriEviNG PrOCESS   We usually think of grief as the psychological process one goes through following the death of a loved one—a process that appears to be more difficult for men than for women (Bonanno & Kaltman, 1999). Grief often has certain characteristic qualities. Indeed, Bowlby’s (1980) classic observations revealed that there are usually four phases of   normal response   to the loss of a spouse or close family member: (1) numbing and disbelief, (2) yearning and searching for the dead person, (3) disorganization and despair that sets in when the person accepts the loss as perma- nent, and (4) some reorganization as the person gradually be- gins to rebuild his or her life. For decades this was generally considered as a normal pat- tern, and in 2007 a careful study of over 200 individuals who had lost a loved one due to natural causes documented that this is indeed the typical sequence (Maciejewski et al., 2007). The normal nature of exhibiting a certain number of grief symptoms led   DSM-IV-TR   to suggest that a major depressive disorder usu- ally should not be diagnosed for the first 2 months following the loss, even if all the symptom criteria are met. However, in a very controversial move, this 2-month bereavement exclusion has now been dropped in   DSM-5   (see “Thinking Critically About  DSM-5 ” box). Another controversial change is described in “Developments in Thinking” box on page 216. It is easy to think of uncomplicated grief as having an adap- tive function (Bowlby, 1980). Traditionally, failing to exhibit grief under conditions in which it seems warranted has been a cause of concern because it was thought to suggest that the per- son was not fully processing the loss, at least at a psychological level. However, recent studies of bereaved individuals following  O ne feature of   DSM-IV   was that it contained a bereave- ment exclusion criterion for major depression. This stipu- lated that people who had recently been bereaved, but who otherwise meet diagnostic criteria for a major depressive episode, could be excluded from being diagnosed with clinical depression for up to 2 months post-loss. This criterion was designed to distinguish true disorder from normal sadness, thus reducing diagnostic false-positives, unnecessary treatment, potential stigmatization, and inflated prevalence rates (Wakefield, Schmitz, First, & Horwitz, 2007). However, no exclusion was made for other types of loss. This raised the issue of whether it was justifiable to consider depres- sion in response to the loss of a loved one as normal, and depres- sion in response to other losses as a form of mental disorder. In an examination of this Wakefield and colleagues (2007) found that bereavement-triggered depression and depression triggered by other forms of loss were very similar on eight of nine symptoms of depression (the exception being that bereaved individuals, not surprisingly, thought about death more). There was therefore no evidence to support granting bereavement special status. In   DSM-5 , many people expected that the specific bereave- ment exclusion would be dropped and replaced by an expanded exclusion that included other types of loss (loss of a job, divorce) as well as death of a loved one. However, in a controversial decision, the bereavement exclusion has not only   not been expanded , but it has been   removed completely  from   DSM-5 . What are the issues here? Dropping the bereavement exclusion may now create the risk that a normal grief reaction becomes misdiagnosed as a major depressive episode leading to un- necessary treatment, stigmatization, or other negative conse- quences. On the other hand, the assumption that any depressive response to the loss of a love one is “normal” could lead to delays in receiving needed treatment. One finding in support of keeping the bereavement criterion as it was in   DSM-IV   is that people who experience symptoms of major depression follow- ing death of a loved one are not at elevated risk for a recur- rence of later major depression the way people who have major depressive episodes under other conditions are. So they may indeed be a special group. What do you think? Is grief normal? How is grief different from depression? Does the removal of the bereavement criterion in   DSM-5   now pathologize grief? Going forward, what do you think some of the consequences of this change in   DSM-5   might be?  Thinking CriTiCally about DSM-5  Was It Wise to Drop the Bereavement Exclusion for Major Depression?   DSM- 5
the loss of a spouse, life partner, or parent have found that about 50 percent exhibit genuine resilience in the face of loss, with min- imal, very short-lived symptoms of depression or bereavement. Also, in contrast to what was previously thought, these resilient individuals are not emotionally maladjusted or unattached to their spouses (e.g., Bonanno et al., 2004; Bonanno et al., 2005).  POSTPArTuM “BLuES”   Even though the birth of a child would usually seem to be a happy event, postpartum depression sometimes occurs in new mothers (and occasionally fathers) and it is known to have adverse effects on child outcomes (e.g., Ramchandani et al., 2005). In the past it was believed that postpartum major depres- sion in mothers was relatively common, but more recent evidence suggests that only “postpartum blues” are very common. The symp- toms of postpartum blues typically include changeable mood, crying easily, sadness, and irritability, often liberally intermixed with happy feelings (Miller, 2002; O’Hara et al., 1990, 1991; Reck et al., 2009). Such symptoms occur in as many as 50 to 70 percent of women within 10 days of the birth of their child and usually sub- side on their own (Miller, 2002; Nolen-Hoeksema & Hilt, 2009). New findings show that hypomanic symptoms are also frequently observed, intermixed with the more depression-like symptoms (Sharma et al., 2009). It appears that major depression in women occurs no more frequently in the postpartum period than would be expected in women of the same age and socioeconomic status who have not just given birth (Hobfoll et al., 1995; O’Hara & Swain, 1996). Especially rare are instances in which the major depression is accompanied by psychotic features. Thus the once firmly held notion that women are at especially high risk for major depres- sion in the postpartum period has not been upheld. There is, however, a greater likelihood of developing major depression after the postpartum blues—especially if they are severe (Henshaw et al., 2004; Reck et al., 2009). Hormonal readjustments (Miller, 2002; O’Hara et al., 1991) and alterations in serotonergic and noradrenergic func- tioning (Doornbos et al., 2008) may play a role in postpartum blues and depression, although the evidence on this issue is mixed. It is obvious that a psychological component is present as well. Postpartum blues or depression may be especially likely to occur if the new mother has lack of social support or has dif- ficulty in adjusting to her new identity and responsibilities, or if the woman has a personal or family history of depression that leads to heightened sensitivity to the stress of childbirth (Collins et al., 2004; Miller, 2002; O’Hara & Gorman, 2004).  Dysthymic Disorder (Persistent Depressive Disorder)  DSM-5 has introduced a new category of disorder called   per- sistent depressive disorder.   This was formerly known as dysth- mia and is described below.   Dysthymic disorder   is generally  This new mother is experiencing postpartum blues; her mood is very la- bile and she cries easily.  developments in Thinking  A New   Dsm - 5   Diagnosis: Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder  A fter years of study, surrounded by some controversy, a new disorder called Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder, has been added to the Depressive Disorders category in  DSM-5 . This disorder is diagnosed if a woman has had a certain set of symptoms in the majority of her menstrual cycles for the past year. In particular she must have at least one of the follow- ing four symptoms in the final week before the onset of menses; these symptoms must start to improve within a few days after the onset of menses, and become minimal or absent in the week post-menses. The four symptoms of which one must occur include (1) marked affective lability such as mood swings, (2) marked irritability or anger or increased interpersonal conflicts, (3) marked depressed mood, or feelings of hopelessness or self- deprecating thoughts, or (4) marked anxiety, tension or feelings of being “keyed up” or “on edge.” There are seven other symp- toms that are listed and a total of five symptoms must be expe- rienced. These other symptoms include (1) decrease interest in usual activities, (2) subjective sense of difficulties in concentra- tion; (3) lethargy, easy fatigibility, or lack of energy, (4) marked changes in appetite or overeating, (5) hypersomnia or insomnia, (6) a sense of being overwhelmed or out of control, and (7) phys- ical symptoms such as breast tenderness or swelling, a sense of bloating, weight gain, etc. This is one form of depression where hormones clearly play an important role.
considered to be of mild to moderate intensity, but its primary hallmark is its chronicity. To qualify for a diagnosis of   persis- tent depressive disorder   (dysthymia), a person must have a persistently depressed mood most of the day, for more days than not, for at least 2 years (1 year for children and adolescents). In addition, individuals must have at least two of six additional symptoms when depressed (see the   DSM-5   box for diagnostic criteria). Periods of normal mood may occur briefly, but they usually last for only a few days to a few weeks (and for a maxi- mum of 2 months). These intermittently normal moods are one of the most important characteristics distinguishing dysthymic disorder from major depressive disorder. Nevertheless, in spite of the intermittently normal moods, because of its chronic course people with dysthymia show poorer outcomes and as much impairment as those with major depression (Klein, 2008, 2010). Dysthymia is quite common, with a lifetime prevalence esti- mated at between 2.5 and 6 percent (Kessler et al., 1994; Kessler, Berglund, Demler et al., 2005). The average duration of dysthy- mia is 4 to 5 years, but it can persist for 20 years or more (Keller et al., 1997; Klein et al., 2006). Chronic stress has been shown to increase the severity of symptoms over a 7.5-year follow-up period (Dougherty et al., 2004). Dysthymia often begins during the teenage years, and over 50 percent of those who present for treatment have an onset before age 21. One 10-year prospective study of 97 individuals with early-onset dysthymia found that 74 percent recovered within 10 years but that, among those who recovered, 71 percent relapsed, with most relapses occurring within approximately 3 years of follow-up (Klein et al., 2006; see also Klein, 2010). The following case is typical of this disorder.  A Dysthymic Executive   A 28-year-old junior execu- tive . . . complained of being “depressed” about everything: her job, her husband, and her prospects for the future. . . . Her complaints were of persistent feelings of depressed mood, inferiority, and pessimism, which she claims to have had since she was 16 or 17 years old. Although she did reasonably well in college, she constantly ruminated about those students who were “genuinely intelligent.” She dated during college and graduate school but claimed that she would never go after a guy she thought was “special,” always feeling inferior and intimidated. . . . Just after graduation, she had married the man she was going out with at the time. She thought of him as reasonably desirable, though not “special,” and married him primarily because she felt she “needed a husband” for companionship. Shortly after their marriage, the couple started to bicker. She was very critical of his clothes, his job, and his parents; and he, in  This disorder represents a consolidation of DSM-IV-defined chronic major depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder.  A.   Depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, as indicated by either subjective account or observation by others, for at least 2 years.  Note:   In children and adolescents, mood can be irritable and duration must be at least 1 year.  B.   Presence, while depressed, of two (or more) of the following:  1.   Poor appetite or overeating.  2.   Insomnia or hypersomnia.  3.   Low energy or fatigue.  4.   Low self-esteem.  5.   Poor concentration or difficulty making decisions.  6.   Feelings of hopelessness.  C.   During the 2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents) of the disturbance, the individual has never been without the symptoms in Criteria A and B for more than 2 months at a time.  D.   Criteria for a major depressive disorder may be continuously present for 2 years.  E.   There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode, and criteria have never been met for cyclothymic disorder.  F.   The disturbance is not better explained by a persistent schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, delusional disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.  G.   The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g. hypothyroidism).  h.   The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impair- ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  Note:   Because the criteria for a major depressive episode include four symptoms that are absent from the symptom list for persis- tent depressive disorder (dysthymia), a very limited number of individuals will have depressive symptoms that have persisted longer than 2 years but will not meet criteria for persistent depres- sive disorder. If full criteria for a major depressive episode have been met at some point during the current episode of illness, they should be given a diagnosis of major depressive disorder. Otherwise, a diagnosis of other specified depressive disorder or unspecified depressive disorder is warranted. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia)   DSM- 5
turn, found her rejecting, controlling, and moody. She began to feel that she had made a mistake in marrying him. Recently she has also been having difficulties at work. She is assigned the most menial tasks at the firm and is never given an assignment of importance or responsibility. She admits that she frequently does a “slipshod” job of what is given her, never does more than is required, and never demonstrates any assertiveness or initiative. . . . She feels that she will never go very far in her profession because she does not have the right “connections” and neither does her husband, yet she dreams of money, status, and power. Her social life with her husband involves several other couples. The man in these couples is usually a friend of her husband. She is sure that the women find her uninteresting and unimpressive and that the people who seem to like her are probably no better off than she. Under the burden of her dissatisfaction with her marriage, her job, and her social life, feeling tired and uninterested in “life,” she now enters treatment for the third time. Source: Adapted with permission from   DSM-IV-TR Casebook: A Learning Companion to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Fourth Edition,   Text Revision   (Copyright © 2002). American Psychiatric Association.  Major Depressive Disorder  The diagnostic criteria for   major depressive disorder   (also known as major depression) require that the person exhibit more symptoms than are required for dysthymia and that the symp- toms be more persistent (not interwoven with periods of normal mood). To receive a diagnosis of major depressive disorder, a person must be in a   major depressive episode   and never have had a manic, hypomanic, or mixed episode. An affected person must experience either markedly depressed moods or marked loss of interest in pleasurable activities most of every day, nearly every day, for at least two consecutive weeks. In addition to showing one or both of these symptoms, the person must experience additional symptoms dur- ing the same period (for a total of at least five symptoms; see the   DSM-5   box on p. 213).  Watch   the   Video   Martha: Major Depressive Disorder (MDD)   on   MyPsychLab . It should be noted that few if any depressions—including milder ones—occur in the absence of significant anxiety (e.g., Merikangas et al., 2003; Mineka et al., 1998; Watson, 2005). Indeed, there is a high degree of overlap between measures of depressive and anxious symptoms in self-reports and in clini- cian ratings. At the diagnostic level, there are very high levels of comorbidity between depressive and anxiety disorders (e.g., Kessler, Merikangas, & Wang, 2007; Watson, 2005). The issues surrounding the co-occurrence of depression and anxiety, which have received a great deal of attention in recent years, are very complex. The following account illustrates a moderately severe case of major depressive disorder.  Connie   Connie, a 33-year-old homemaker and mother of a 4-year-old son, Robert, is referred . . . to a psychiatric outpa- tient program because . . . she has been depressed and unable to concentrate ever since she separated from her husband 3 months previously. Connie left her husband, Donald, after a 5-year marriage. Violent arguments between them, during which Connie was beaten by her husband, had occurred for the last 4 years of their marriage, beginning when she became pregnant with Robert. There were daily arguments during which Donald hit her hard enough to leave bruises on her face and arms. . . . Before her marriage . . . she was close to her parents [and] had many friends who she also saw regularly . . . . In high school she had been a popular cheerleader and a good student. . . . She had no personal history of depression, and there was no family history of . . . mental illness. During the first year of marriage, Donald became increas- ingly irritable and critical of Connie. He began to request that Connie stop calling and seeing her friends after work, and refused to allow them or his in-laws to visit their apartment. . . . Despite her misgivings about Donald’s behavior toward her, Connie decided to become pregnant. During the seventh month of the pregnancy . . Donald began complaining [and] began hitting her with his fists. She left him and went to live with her parents for a week. He expressed remorse . . . and . . . Connie returned to her apartment. No further violence occurred until after Robert’s birth. At that time, Donald began using cocaine every weekend and often became violent when he was high. In the 3 months since she left Donald, Connie has become increasingly depressed. Her appetite has been poor and she has lost 10 pounds. She cries a lot and often wakes up at 5:00   A.m. and is unable to get back to sleep. . . . Connie is pale and thin. . . . She speaks slowly, describing her depressed mood and lack of energy. She says that her only pleasure is in being with her son. She is able to take care of him physically but feels guilty because her preoccupation with her own bad feelings prevents  A person with major depressive disorder may experience a loss of en- ergy, too much or too little sleep, decreased appetite and weight loss, an increase or slowdown in mental and physical activity, difficulty concen- trating, irrational guilt, and recurrent thoughts of death or suicide.
her from being able to play with him. She now has no contacts other than with her parents and her son. She feels worthless and blames herself for her marital problems, saying that if she had been a better wife, maybe Donald would have been able to give up the cocaine. . . . Source: Adapted with permission from   DSM-IV-TR Casebook: A Learning Companion to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ,   Fourth Edition,   Text Revision   (Copyright © 2002). American Psychiatric Association.  Connie’s case clearly illustrates that a person with major depres- sive disorder shows not only mood symptoms of sadness but also a variety of symptoms that are more severe than those in milder forms of depression. Connie shows various cognitive distor- tions, including feeling worthless and guilty. She complains of a lack of energy and inability to play with her child. Her physical symptoms include loss of appetite and early morning awaken- ing. The loss of contact with friends also occurs commonly with major depression, in part because the person is unmotivated to seek contact. Connie’s case also illustrates the multiple complex, interacting factors that may be involved in the etiology of depres- sion. Although she does not have a personal or a family history of depression, the experiences from 5 years of a very difficult marriage to a violent and abusive husband were sufficient to finally precipitate her major depressive episode.  Depression as a recurrent DisorDer   When a diagno- sis of major depressive disorder is made, it is usually also specified whether this is a first, and therefore   single   (initial), episode or a  recurrent   episode (preceded by one or more previous episodes). This reflects the fact that depressive episodes are usually time limited; the average duration of an untreated episode is about 6 to 9 months. In a large untreated sample of women with depression, certain predictors pointed to a longer time to spontaneous remis- sion of symptoms: having financial difficulties, severe stressful life events, and high genetic risk (Kendler, Walters, & Kessler, 1997). In approximately 10 to 20 percent of people with major depression, the symptoms do not remit for over 2 years, in which case persistent depressive disorder is diagnosed (Boland & Keller, 2009; Gilmer et al., 2005). Chronic major depression has been associated with serious childhood family problems and an anxious personality in childhood (Angst et al., 2011). Although most depressive episodes remit (which is not said to occur until symptoms have largely been gone for at least 2 months), depressive episodes often recur at some future point. In recent years,   recurrence   has been distinguished from   relapse . Relapse refers to the return of symptoms within a fairly short period of time, a situation that probably reflects the fact that the underlying episode of depression has not yet run its course (Boland & Keller, 2002; Frank et al., 1991). For example, relapse may commonly occur when pharmacotherapy is terminated pre- maturely—after symptoms have remitted but before the underly- ing episode is really over (Hollon & Dimidjian, 2009). Until very recently the proportion of patients who will exhibit a recurrence (i.e., a new episode of depression) of major depression has been estimated as 60 percent, although the time period before a recurrence occurs is highly variable. However, a careful review of the studies leading to the 60-percent estimate has shown that there were methodological flaws in the way these estimates were calculated and that a more accurate estimate is that 40 or 50 percent will have a recurrence at some point (Monroe & Harkness, 2011). There is also evidence that the probability of recurrence increases with the number of prior episodes and also when the person has comorbid disorders. Unfortunately very little is known about what the differences are between people who will only suffer a single depressive episode and those who will go on to develop more (Monroe & Harkness, 2011). The traditional view is that between episodes a person suffer- ing from a recurrent major mood disorder is essentially symptom free. However, as more research data on the course of depression became available (e.g., Coryell & Winokur, 1992; Judd et al., 1998), it became clear that this is frequently not the case. For example, in a large five-site study with over 400 patients, Judd and colleagues (1998) found that patients experiencing their first episode of depression at the time of the study were only symptom free for about 54 percent of the weeks of the 12-year follow-up period. Patients who had had more than one episode of depression at the start of the study fared even worse. Those in this group were symptom free for only 37 percent of weeks during the follow-up. Moreover, people with some residual symptoms, or with signifi- cant psychosocial impairment, following an episode are even more likely to have recurrences than those whose symptoms remit com- pletely (Judd et al., 1999; Solomon et al., 2004).  Depression throughout the Life cycLe   Although the onset of unipolar depressive disorders most often occurs during late adolescence up to middle adulthood, such reactions may begin at any time from early childhood to old age. Depression was once thought not to occur in childhood, but more recent research has estimated that about 1 to 3 percent of school-age children meet the criteria for some form of unipolar depressive disorder, with a smaller percentage exhibiting dysthymic disorder than major depression (see Avenevoli et al., 2008; Garber et al., 2009). As in adults, recurrence rates are high in children. Even infants may experience a form of depression (formerly known as   anaclitic depres- sion   or despair) if they are separated for a prolonged period from their attachment figure (usually their mother; Bowlby, 1973, 1980; Speier et al., 1995), although current thinking suggests this may not happen until at least 18 months of age (Guedeney, 2007). The incidence of depression rises sharply during adolescence— a period of great turmoil for many people. Indeed, one review estimated that approximately 15 to 20 percent of adolescents expe- rience major depressive disorder at some point and subclinical levels of depression affect a further 10 to 20 percent (Avenevoli et al., 2008; Lewinsohn & Essau, 2002). It is during this time period
that sex differences in rates of depression first emerge (e.g., Essau, Lewinsohn, Seeley, & Sasagawa, 2010; Hankin et al., 2008; Nolen- Hoeksema, 2012; Nolen-Hoeksema & Hilt, 2009). The Develop- ments in Research box on page 235 provides some insights into why this might be. The long-term effects of major depressive disor- der in adolescence can last at least through young adulthood, when such individuals show small but significant psychosocial impair- ments in many domains, including their occupational lives, inter- personal relationships, and general quality of life (e.g., Lewinsohn et al., 2003; Rudolph, 2009). Moreover, major depression that occurs in adolescence is very likely to recur in adulthood (Avenevoli et al., 2008; Rudolph, 2009). The occurrence of major depression continues into later life. Although the 1-year prevalence of major depression is significantly lower in people over age 65 than in younger adults (Kessler et al., 2010), major depression and dysthymia in older adults are still considered a major public health problem today (Blazer & Hybels, 2009; Kessler, Berglund, Demler et al., 2005). Moreover, research suggests that rates of depression among physically ill residents of nursing homes or residential care facilities are substantially higher than among older adults living at home (see Davison et al., 2007; Powers et al., 2002). Unfortunately, depression in later life can be difficult to diagnose because many of the symptoms overlap with those of several medical illnesses and dementia (Alexopoulos et al., 2002; Harvey et al., 2006). Yet it is very important to try and diagnose it reliably because depression in later life has many adverse consequences for a person’s health, including doubling the risk of death in people who have had a heart attack or stroke (e.g., Davidson et al., 2010; Schulz et al., 2002).  SPECiFiErS FOr MAjOr DEPrESSivE EPiSODES   Some individuals who meet the basic criteria for diagnosis of a major de- pressive episode also have additional patterns of symptoms or fea- tures that are important to note when making a diagnosis because these patterns have implications for understanding more about the course of the disorder and its most effective treatment. These different patterns of symptoms or features are called   specifiers  in   DSM-5   (see Table 7.1 for a summary of the major specifiers). One such specifier is   major depressive episode with melancholic features . This designation is applied when, in addition to meeting the criteria for a major depressive episode, a patient either has lost interest or pleasure in almost all activities or does not react to usu- ally pleasurable stimuli or desired events. This severe subtype of depression is more heritable than most other forms of depression and is more often associated with a history of childhood trauma (Harkness & Monroe, 2002; Kendler, 1997). People with this subtype of depression also show greater cognitive impairment than with most other subtypes of depression (Withall et al., 2010). Psychotic symptoms, characterized by loss of contact with reality and delusions (false beliefs) or hallucinations (false sen- sory perceptions), may sometimes accompany other symptoms of major depression. In such cases the diagnosis is   severe major depressive episode with psychotic features . Ordinarily, any delusions or hallucinations present are   mood congruent —that is, they seem in some sense appropriate to serious depression because the content is negative in tone, such as themes of per- sonal inadequacy, guilt, deserved punishment, death, or disease. For example, the delusional idea that one’s internal organs have totally deteriorated—an idea sometimes held by people with severe depression—ties in with the mood of a person who is despondent. Feelings of guilt and worthlessness are also com- monly part of the clinical picture (Keller et al., 2007; Ohayon & Shatzberg, 2002). Individuals who are psychotically depressed are likely to have longer episodes, more cognitive impairment, and a poorer long-term prognosis than those suffering from depression without psychotic features (Bora et al., 2010; Flores & Schatzberg, 2006), and any recurrent episodes are also likely to be characterized by psychotic symptoms (Fleming et al., 2004). Treatment generally involves an antipsychotic medication as well as an antidepressant (Keller et al., 2007). A third important specifier is used when the individual shows “atypical features.”   Major depressive episode with atyp- ical features   includes a pattern of symptoms characterized by mood reactivity; that is, the person’s mood brightens in response to potential positive events. In addition, the person must show two or more of the four symptoms listed in Table 7.1. A dispro- portionate number of individuals who have atypical features are females, who have an earlier-than-average age of onset and who are more likely to show suicidal thoughts (Matza et al., 2003). Research has also shown that atypical depression is linked to a mild form of bipolar disorder that is associated with hypomanic rather than manic episodes (Akiskal & Benazzi, 2005). This is also an important specifier because there are indications that  table   7.1  Specifiers of Major Depressive Episodes Specifier   Characteristic Symptoms With Melancholic Features  Three of the following: Early morning awaken- ing, depression worse in the morning, marked psychomotor agitation or retardation, loss of appetite or weight, excessive guilt, qualita- tively different depressed mood.  With Psychotic Features  Delusions or hallucinations (usually mood con- gruent); feelings of guilt and worthlessness common.  With Atypical Features  Mood reactivity—brightens to positive events; two of the four following symptoms: weight gain or increase in appetite, hypersomnia, leaden paralysis (arms and legs feel as heavy as lead), being acutely sensitive to interpersonal rejection.  With Catatonic Features  A range of psychomotor symptoms from mo- toric immobility to extensive psychomotor activity, as well as mutism and rigidity.  With Seasonal Pattern  At least two or more episodes in past 2 years that have occurred at the same time (usually fall or winter), and full remission at the same time (usually spring). No other nonseasonal episodes in the same 2-year period.
individuals with atypical features may preferentially respond to a different class of antidepressants—the monoamine oxidase inhibitors—than do most other individuals with depression. A fourth specifier is used when the individual shows marked psychomotor disturbances.   Major depressive episode with catatonic features   includes a range of psychomotor symp- toms, from motoric immobility ( catalepsy —a stuporous state) to extensive psychomotor activity, as well as mutism and rigidity. Catatonia is known more as a subtype of schizophrenia, but it is actually more frequently associated with certain forms of depres- sion and mania than with schizophrenia (Fink & Taylor, 2006). A fifth specifier is used when individuals who experience recurrent depressive episodes show a seasonal pattern,   recurrent major depressive episode with a seasonal pattern , also com- monly known as   seasonal affective disorder . To meet   DSM-5  criteria for this specifier, the person must have had at least two episodes of depression in the past 2 years occurring at the same time of the year (most commonly fall or winter), and full remis- sion must also have occurred at the same time of the year (most commonly spring). In addition, the person cannot have had other, nonseasonal depressive episodes in the same 2-year period, and most of the person’s lifetime depressive episodes must have been of the seasonal variety. Prevalence rates suggest that winter seasonal affective disorder is more common in people living at higher latitudes (northern climates) and in younger people. It is not at all uncommon for major depression to coexist with dysthymia in some people, a condition given the designa- tion   double depression   (Boland & Keller, 2009; Klein, 2010). People with double depression are moderately depressed on a chronic basis (meeting symptom criteria for dysthymia) but undergo increased problems from time to time, during which they also meet criteria for a major depressive episode. Among clinical samples of people with dysthymia, the experience of dou- ble depression appears to be very common, although it may be much less common in people with dysthymic disorder who never seek treatment (Akiskal, 1997). For example, one clinical sample of nearly 100 individuals with early-onset dysthymia (onset before age 21) was followed for 10 years, during which time 84 percent experienced at least one major depressive episode (Klein et al., 2006; see also Keller et al., 1997). Although nearly all individuals with double depression appear to recover from their major depressive episodes (although usually just to their previ- ous level of dysthymia) recurrence is common (Boland & Keller, 2002; Klein, 2008, 2010; Klein et al., 2006). In DSM-5, double depression will be classified as a form of persistent depressive disorder along with dysthymia and   chronic major depressive disorder . The term “persistent” was adopted because it was felt to be less pejorative than the word chronic.  in review  •   What are the major features that differentiate dysthymic disorder and major depressive disorder?  •   Distinguish between recurrence and relapse.  •   What are three common specifiers of major depressive disorder?  •   What is double depression?  Causal Factors in Unipolar Mood Disorders  In considering the development of unipolar mood disorders, researchers have focused on the possible roles of biological, psy- chological, and sociocultural factors. Although each set of factors has usually been studied separately, ultimately the goal should be to understand how these different kinds of causal factors are interrelated in order to develop a biopsychosocial model.  Biological Causal Factors  It has long been known that a variety of diseases and drugs can affect mood, leading sometimes to depression and some- times to elation or even mania. Indeed, this idea goes back to Hippocrates (c. 400 b.c.), who hypothesized that depression was caused by an excess of “black bile” in the system. As we will discuss, in the past half century investigators attempting to establish a biological basis for unipolar disorders have con- sidered a wide range of factors.  GENETiC iNFLuENCES   Family studies   have shown that the prevalence of mood disorders is approximately two to three times higher among blood relatives of persons with clinically diagnosed unipolar depression than it is in the population at large (e.g., Levinson, 2006, 2009; Wallace et al., 2002). More importantly, however,   twin studies , which can provide much more conclusive evidence of genetic influences on a disorder, also suggest a mod- erate genetic contribution to unipolar depression. Sullivan and colleagues (2000) conducted a quantitative review of numerous twin studies (the total number of twins studied was over 21,000) and found that monozygotic co-twins of a twin with unipolar major depression are about twice as likely to develop major de- pression as are dizygotic co-twins. Averaging across the results of these studies, this review suggested that about 31 to 42 percent of the variance in liability to major depression is due to genetic influences. The estimate is substantially higher (70 to 80 per- cent) for more severe, early-onset, or recurrent depressions (see also Levinson, 2009; McGuffin et al., 2007). Notably, however, Sullivan and colleagues’ review concluded that even more vari- ance in the liability to most forms of major depression is due to nonshared environmental influences (i.e., experiences that family members do not share) than to genetic factors. Taken together, the results from family and twin studies make a strong case for a moderate genetic contribution to the causal patterns of unipolar major depression, although not as large a genetic contribution as for bipolar disorder (Farmer et al., 2005; Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). Unfortunately, the evidence for a genetic contribution to milder but chronic forms of unipo- lar depression such as dysthymia is very slim, probably because
there has been very little research on the topic (Klein, 2008). However, it seems very probable that there is a genetic contribu- tion to dysthymia because of its strong link to elevated levels of the personality trait neuroticism, which is moderately heritable. Attempts to identify specific genes that may be responsible for these genetic influences have not yet been successful, although there are some promising leads (Levinson, 2006, 2009; Wal- lace et al., 2002). As discussed in Chapter 3, one very promis- ing candidate for a specific gene that might be implicated is the  serotonin-transporter gene —a gene involved in the transmission and reuptake of serotonin, one of the key neurotransmitters involved in depression. There are two different kinds of versions or alleles involved—the short allele ( s ) and the long allele ( l ). People either have two short alleles ( ss ), two long alleles ( ll ), or one of each ( sl ). Previous work with animals had suggested that having   ss   alleles might predispose a person to depression relative to a person hav- ing   ll   alleles, but human work on this issue provided mixed results. In 2003, Caspi and colleagues published a landmark study in which they tested for the possibility of a   genotype–environment interaction   involving these two alleles of the serotonin-transporter gene. They studied 847 people in New Zealand who had been fol- lowed from birth to 26 years of age, at which time the researchers assessed diagnoses of major depressive episodes in the past year and the occurrence of stressful life events in the previous 5 years. Their results were very striking: As illustrated in Figure 7.1, indi- viduals who possessed the genotype with the   ss   alleles were twice as likely to develop a major depressive episode following four or more stressful life events in the past 5 years as those who possessed the genotype with the   ll   alleles and had experienced four or more stressful events (those with the   sl   alleles were intermediate). More- over, they found that those who had the   ss   alleles and had expe- rienced severe maltreatment as children were also twice as likely to develop a major depressive episode as those with the   ll   alleles who had had severe maltreatment and also as compared to those with the   ss   alleles who had not been maltreated as children. These findings strongly support a diathesis-stress model; many other (but not all) studies being conducted have found similar results (e.g., Kendler et al., 2005; Uher & McGuffin, 2010). However, in 2009 a quantitative review by Risch and colleagues (2009) chal- lenged these results; this led to a major controversy in the field. Fortunately by 2011 other quantitative reviews had demonstrated that the gene–environment result is robust if the studies use sensi- tive interview-based measures of life stress (McGuffin, 2010; see also Karg et al., 2011). Such results suggest that the search for can- didate genes that are likely to be involved in the etiology of major depression is likely to be much more fruitful if researchers also test for genotype–environment interactions, beyond examining the effects of a genotype itself (see Moffitt et al., 2005).  NEurOChEMiCAL FACTOrS   Ever since the 1960s, the view that depression may arise from disruptions in the delicate bal- ance of neurotransmitter substances that regulate and mediate the activity of the brain’s nerve cells has received a great deal of attention. A large body of evidence suggested that various bio- logical therapies (discussed later in this chapter) that are often used to treat severe mood disorders—such as electroconvulsive therapy and antidepressant medications—affect the concentra- tions or the activity of neurotransmitters at the synapse. Such early findings encouraged the development of neurochemical theories of the etiology of major depression. Early attention in the 1960s and 1970s focused primarily on two neurotransmitters of the monoamine class—norepi- nephrine and serotonin—because researchers observed that antidepressant medications seemed to have the effect of increas- ing these neurotransmitters’ availability at synaptic junctions (e.g., Thase & Denko, 2008; Thase et al., 2002). This obser- vation led to the once influential   monoamine theory of depres- sion —that depression was at least sometimes due to an absolute or relative depletion of one or both of these neurotransmitters at important receptor sites in the brain (Schildkraut, 1965). This depletion could come about through impaired synthesis of these neurotransmitters in the presynaptic neuron, through increased degradation of the neurotransmitters once they were released into the synapse, or through altered functioning of postsynaptic receptors (Thase, 2009; Thase et al., 2002). Collectively, these neurotransmitters are now known to be involved in the regulation of behavioral activity, stress, emo- tional expression, and vegetative functions (involving appe- tite, sleep, and arousal)—all of which are disturbed in mood  s / l l / l  1 0   2   3   4+  Probability of major depressive episode Number of stressful life events  0 50 40 30 20 10  s / s  figure   7.1  Number of Stressful Life Events versus Probability of Major Depressive Episode.   Results demonstrate the association between the number of stressful life events (between ages 21 and 26 years) and probability of a major depressive episode at age 26 as a function of 5-HTT genotype. Life events predicted a diagnosis of major depression among carriers of the   s  allele ( ss   or   sl ), but not among carriers of two   l   alleles ( ll ).  Source:   Caspi et al., 2003. Influence of life stress on depression: Moderation by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene.   Science, 301 , 386–89. Reprinted with permission from   Science , 18 July 2003, Vol. 301. Copyright © 2003 AAAS.
disorders (Garlow & Nemeroff, 2003; Southwick, Vythilin- gam, Charney, 2005; Thase, 2009). However, by the 1980s it was clear that no such straight- forward mechanisms could possibly be responsible for causing depression (e.g., Krishnan & Nestler, 2010; Thase, 2009). For example, some studies have found exactly the opposite of what is predicted by the monoamine hypothesis—that is, net increases in norepinephrine activity in patients with depression—espe- cially in those with severe or melancholic depression (see Thase & Denko, 2008; Thase et al., 2002). Moreover, only a minority of patients with depression have lowered serotonin activity, and these tend to be patients with high levels of suicidal ideation and behavior. Finally, even though the immediate, short-term effects of antidepressant drugs are to increase the availability of norepi- nephrine and serotonin, the long-term clinical effects of these drugs do not emerge until 2 to 4 weeks later, when neurotrans- mitter levels may have normalized. Other more recent research also suggests that dopamine dysfunction (especially reduced dopaminergic activity) plays a significant role in at least some forms of depression, including depression with atypical features and bipolar depression (e.g., Dunlop & Nemeroff, 2007; Krishnan & Nestler, 2010; Thase, 2009). Because the neurotransmitter dopamine is so prominently involved in the experience of pleasure and reward, such findings are in keeping with the prominence of anhedonia, the inability to experience pleasure, which is such an important symptom of depression. Unfortunately, the early monoamine theory has not been replaced by a compelling alternative. Altered neurotransmit- ter activity in several systems is clearly associated with major depression, but research for the past 20 to 25 years has focused on complex interactions of neurotransmitters and how they affect cellular functioning. A number of integrative theories have been proposed that include a role for neurotransmitters, not alone but rather as they interact with other disturbed hor- monal and neurophysiological patterns and biological rhythms (e.g., Garlow & Nemeroff, 2003; Thase, 2009). An interesting new focus of some of this research is on understanding how interactions among these different neurobiological systems can promote resilience in the face of major stress (a very common precipitant for depression), which in turn may help explain why only a subset of people experiencing major stressors develop depression (Southwick et al., 2005).  ABNOrMALiTiES OF hOrMONAL rEGuLATOry AND iMMuNE SySTEMS   Research interest has focused on possible hormonal causes or correlates of some forms of mood disorder (Southwick et al., 2005; Thase, 2009; Thase et al., 2002). The majority of attention has been focused on the   hypothalamic- pituitary-adrenal   ( HPA )   axis , and in particular on the hormone cortisol, which is excreted by the outermost portion of the ad- renal glands and is regulated through a complex feedback loop (refer back to Figures 3.5 and 5.1). The human stress response is associated with elevated activity of the HPA axis, which is partly controlled by norepinephrine and serotonin. The per- ception of stress or threat can lead to norepinephrine activity in the hypothalamus, causing the release of corticotrophin- releasing hormone (CRH) from the hypothalamus. This in turn triggers release of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the pituitary. The ACTH then typically travels through the blood to the adrenal cortex of the adrenal glands, where cortisol is released. Elevated cortisol activity is highly adaptive in the short term because it promotes survival in response to life-threatening or overwhelming life circumstances. However, sustained elevations are harmful to the organism, including promoting hypertension, heart disease, and obesity (which are all elevated in depression) (Stetler & Miller, 2011; Thase, 2009). Blood plasma levels of cortisol are known to be elevated in some 20 to 40 percent of outpatients with depression and in about 60 to 80 percent of hospitalized patients with severe depression (Thase et al., 2002). Sustained elevations in cortisol—a “hallmark of mammalian stress responses”—can result from increased CRH activation (for example, during sustained stress or threat), increased secretion of ACTH, or the failure of feedback mechanisms. One line of evidence that implicates the failure of feed- back mechanisms in some patients with depression comes from robust findings that in about 45 percent of patients with serious depression,   dexamethasone , a potent suppressor of plasma cortisol in normal individuals, either fails entirely to suppress cortisol or fails to sustain its suppression (Carroll, 2009; Thase et al., 2002). This means that the HPA axis is not operating properly in these “dexamethasone nonsuppres- sors.” It was initially thought that dexamethasone nonsup- pressor patients constituted a distinct subgroup of people with severe or melancholic depression (e.g., Holsboer, 1992). However, subsequent research has shown that several other groups of psychiatric patients, such as those with panic disor- der, also exhibit high rates of nonsuppression. This suggests that nonsuppression may merely be a nonspecific indicator of generalized mental distress. Research has also revealed that patients having depression with elevated cortisol also tend to show memory impairments and problems with abstract thinking and complex problem solving (Belanoff et al., 2001). Some of these cognitive prob- lems may be related to other findings showing that prolonged elevations in cortisol, such as those seen in moderate to severe depression, result in cell death in the hippocampus—a part of the limbic system heavily involved in memory functioning (e.g., Southwick et al., 2005; Thase, 2009). Other interesting research has shown that stress in infancy and early childhood can pro- mote long-term changes that increase the reactivity of the HPA axis, which may in turn help explain why children reared in envi- ronments with early adversity are at higher risk for developing depression later in life when they are exposed to acute stressors (e.g., Southwick et al., 2005).
The other endocrine axis that has relevance to depression is the   hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis   because disturbances to this axis are also linked to mood disorders (Garlow & Nemeroff, 2003; Thase, 2009; Thase et al., 2002). For example, people with low thyroid levels ( hypothyroidism ) often become depressed. In addition, about 20 to 30 percent of patients with depression who have normal thyroid levels nevertheless show dysregulation of this axis. Moreover, preliminary findings suggest that some patients who have not responded to traditional antidepressant treatments may show improvement when administered thyro- tropin-releasing hormone, which leads to increased thyroid hor- mone levels (Garlow & Nemeroff, 2003; Thase, 2009). Finally, in recent years many studies have shown that depression is also accompanied by dysregulation of the   immune system . For example, in a quantitative review Dowlati and col- leagues (2010) have shown that depression is associated with activation of the inflammatory response system as evidenced by increased production of proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin and interferon. Both of these can contribute directly to the development of depressive symptoms.  NEurOPhySiOLOGiCAL AND NEurOANATOMiCAL iNFLuENCES   Exciting neurophysiological research in recent years has followed up on earlier neurological findings that dam- age (for example, from a stroke) to the left, but not the right,  anterior prefrontal cortex   often leads to depression (e.g., Davidson et al., 2009; Robinson & Downhill, 1995). This led to the idea that depression in people without brain damage may nonetheless be linked to lowered levels of brain activity in this same region. A number of studies have supported this idea. When one mea- sures the electroencephalographic (EEG) activity of both cerebral hemispheres in people who are depressed, one finds an asym- metry or imbalance in the EEG activity of the two sides of the prefrontal regions of the brain. In particular, people with depres- sion show relatively low activity in the left hemisphere in these regions and relatively high activity in the right hemisphere (Da- vidson et al., 2009; Stewart et al., 2010, 2011). Similar findings have been reported using PET neuroimaging techniques (see Davidson et al., 2009; Phillips et al., 2003). Notably, patients in remission show the same pattern (Henriques & Davidson, 1990; Stewart et al., 2010, 2011), as do children at risk for depression (Bruder et al., 2007). These latter findings hold promise as a way of identifying persons at risk both for an initial episode and for recurrent episodes. Indeed, a recent study found that left frontal asymmetry in never-depressed individuals predicted onset of major and minor depressive episodes over a 3-year period (Nuss- lock et al., 2011). The relatively lower activity on the left side of the prefrontal cortex in depression is thought to be related to symptoms of reduced positive affect and approach behaviors to rewarding stimuli, and increased right-side activity is thought to underlie increased anxiety symptoms and increased negative af- fect associated with increased vigilance for threatening informa- tion (Pizzagalli et al., 2002). Abnormalities have also been detected in several other brain areas in patients with depression as illustrated in Figure 7.2 (Davidson et al., 2009; Koolschijn et al., 2009). For example, several regions of the prefrontal cortex, including the   orbital pre- frontal cortex , which is involved in responsivity to reward (e.g., Haber & Knutson, 2010), show decreased volume in individuals with recurrent depression relative to normal controls (Koolschijn et al., 2009; Phillips et al., 2003). Lower levels of activity in the  dorsolateral prefrontal cortex , which are associated with decreased  Functional MRI changes (see Chapter 4) in depressed patients in response to affective stimuli from pre- to posttreatment. These red and yellow images illustrate (in three different views) the increase in left prefrontal activation that occurred in a group of depressed patients following treatment compared to their activation pattern during an acute depressive episode. Thus, the red and yellow im- ages depict the increase in cerebral blood in the left prefrontal area in response to affective stimuli from before and after successful antidepressant treatment. The second scan was obtained 8 weeks following the first scan. Patients were treated with an antidepressant medication during those 8 weeks. (This image courtesy of Richard Davidson.)
cognitive control, have also been observed in individuals with depression compared to controls (Disner et al., 2011; see also Chang et al., 2011), and seem to normalize following treatment with antidepressant medication (Fales et al., 2009). Another area involved is the   hippocampus , which is critical to learning and memory and regulation of adrenocorticotropic hormone. As already noted, prolonged depression often leads to decreased hippocampal volume, at least in older people with depression. This could be due to cell atrophy or cell death (e.g., Koolschijn et al., 2009; Sapolsky, 2000). In addition, evidence of decreased hippocampal volume in never-depressed individuals who are at high (versus low) risk for depression suggests that reductions in hippocampal volume may precede the onset of depression (Chen et al., 2010). A third such area is the   anterior cingulate cortex , which both shows decreased volume and abnormally low levels of activation in patients with depression (Koolschijn et al., 2009). This area is involved in selective attention, which is important in prioritiz- ing the most important information available, and therefore in self-regulation and adaptability—all important processes that are disrupted in depression. Finally, the   amygdala , which is involved in the perception of threat and in directing attention, tends to show increased activation in individuals with depression (and anxiety disorders), which may be related to their biased attention to negative emo- tional information (Davidson et al., 2009; Disner et al., 2011; Phillips et al., 2003).  SLEEP AND OThEr BiOLOGiCAL rhyThMS   Although find- ings of sleep disturbances in patients with depression have ex- isted as long as depression has been studied, only recently have some of these findings been linked to more general disturbances in biological rhythms.  Sleep   Sleep is characterized by five stages that occur in a relatively invariant sequence throughout the night (Stages 1 to 4 of non-REM sleep and REM sleep make up a sleep cycle). REM sleep (rapid eye movement sleep) is characterized by rapid eye movements and dreaming as well as other bodily changes; the first REM period does not usually begin until near the end of the first sleep cycle, about 75 to 80 minutes into sleep. This normal sleep–wake cycle is thought to be regulated by the   suprachiasmatic nucleus   of the hypothalamus (e.g., Steiger, 2007; Thase, 2009). Patients who are depressed often show one or more of a variety of sleep problems, ranging from early morning awakening, periodic awakening during the night (poor sleep maintenance), and, for some, difficulty falling asleep. Such changes occur in about 80 percent of hospitalized patients with depression and in about 50 percent of outpatients with depression, and are particularly pro- nounced in patients with melancholic features. Moreover, research using EEG recordings has found that many patients with depression enter the first period of REM sleep after only 60 minutes or less of sleep (i.e., 15 to 20 min- utes sooner than patients who are not depressed do) and also show greater amounts of REM sleep during the early cycles  Orbital prefrontal  cortex Ventromedial prefrontal cortex Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex Anterior cingulate cortex Amygdala Hippocampus  A C B D  figure   7.2  The key brain regions involved in affect and mood disorders are the (A) orbital prefrontal cortex and ventromedial pre- frontal cortex, (B) dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, (C) hippo- campus and amygdala, and (D) anterior cingulate cortex.  Source:   From R. J. Davidson, Diego Pizzagalli, and Jack Nitschke. (2002). The representation and regulation of emotion in depression. In I. H. Gotlib and C. L. Hammen (Eds.),  Handbook of Depression  (pp. 219–44). New York: Guilford.
than are seen in persons without depression. The intensity and frequency of their rapid eye movements are also greater than in patients who are not depressed (Thase et al., 2002). Because this is the period of the night when most deep sleep (Stages 3 and 4) usually occurs, the person with depression also gets a lower-than-normal amount of deep sleep. Both the reduced latency to enter REM sleep and the decreased amount of deep sleep often precede the onset of depression and persist follow- ing recovery, which suggests that they may be vulnerability markers for certain forms of major depression (Hasler et al., 2004; Thase et al., 2002).  Circadian rhythms   Humans have many circadian (24-hour, or daily) cycles other than sleep, including body temperature, propensity to REM sleep, and secretion of cortisol, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and growth hormone (Thase, 2009; Thase et al., 2002). These circadian rhythms are controlled by two related central “oscillators,” which act as internal biological clocks. Research has found some abnormalities in all of these rhythms in patients with depression, though not all patients show abnor- malities in all rhythms (Howland & Thase, 1999; Thase, 2009). Although the exact nature of the dysfunctions is not yet known, some kind of circadian rhythm dysfunction may play a causal role in many of the clinical features of depression. Two current theo- ries are (1) that the size or magnitude of the circadian rhythms is blunted, and (2) that the various circadian rhythms that are nor- mally well synchronized with each other become desynchronized or uncoupled (Howland & Thase, 1999; Thase et al., 2002).  Sunlight and Seasons   Another, rather different kind of rhythm abnormality or disturbance is seen in people with  seasonal affective disorder , in which most of those affected seem to be responsive to the total quantity of available light in the environment (Oren & Rosenthal, 1992). A majority (but not all) become depressed in the fall and winter and normalize in the spring and summer (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Howland & Thase, 1999). Research in animals has also documented that many seasonal variations in basic functions such as sleep, activity, and appetite are related to the amount of light in a day (which, except near the equator, is much greater in summer than in win- ter). Patients with depression who fit the seasonal pattern usually show increased appetite and hypersomnia rather than decreased appetite and insomnia (Howland & Thase, 1999). They also have clear disturbances in their circadian cycles, showing weaker 24-hour patterns than are found in individuals who are not depressed (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Howland & Thase, 1999). A good deal of research on patients with seasonal affective disorder supports the therapeutic use of controlled exposure to light, even artificial light, which may work by reestablishing nor- mal biological rhythms (Fava & Rosenbaum, 1995; Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). Although anti-depressant medications can also be useful, the use of light therapy is more cost efficient in the long term (Cheung et al., 2012).  BiOLOGiCAL ExPLANATiONS FOr SEx DiFFErENCES  Before we leave the topic of possible biological causal factors for depression, we should note that it has been suggested that hormonal factors such as normal fluctuations in ovarian hor- mones account for sex differences in depression (Deecher et al., 2008). However, studies examining this hypothesis have yielded inconsistent results and overall are not very supportive (Nolen-Hoeksema, 2002; Nolen-Hoeksema & Hilt, 2009). It seems that for the majority of women, hormonal changes occurring at various points (e.g., at the onset of puberty, before menstruation, in the postpartum period, and at menopause) do not play a significant role in causing depression. However, it remains possible that there is a causal association that has not yet been discovered because of real methodological difficulties in conducting conclusive research on this topic (Naninck et al., 2011; Sanborn & Hayward, 2003). Moreover, for a small mi- nority of women who are already at high risk (for example, by being at high genetic risk), hormonal fluctuations may trigger depressive episodes, possibly by causing changes in the normal processes that regulate neurotransmitter systems (Deecher et al., 2008; Naninck et al., 2011). Some studies have suggested that women have a greater genetic vulnerability to depression than men, but many other studies have not supported this idea (e.g., Nolen-Hoeksema, 2002; Nolen-Hoeksema & Hilt, 2009; Wallace et al., 2002).  Psychological Causal Factors  The evidence for important psychological causal factors in most unipolar mood disorders is at least as strong as the evidence for biological factors. However, it is likely that the effects of at least some psychological factors such as stressful life events are medi- ated by a cascade of underlying biological changes that they initiate. One way in which stressors may act is through their effects on biochemical and hormonal balances and on biological rhythms (Hammen, 2005; Monroe, 2008).  STrESSFuL LiFE EvENTS AS CAuSAL FACTOrS   Psychologi- cal stressors are known to be involved in the onset of a variety of disorders, ranging from some of the anxiety disorders to  People who live in higher latitudes (northern climates for those in the northern hemisphere) are more likely to exhibit seasonal affective disor- der, in which depression occurs primarily in the fall and winter months and tends to remit in the spring or summer months.
schizophrenia, but nowhere has their role been more carefully studied than in the case of unipolar major depression. Many studies have shown that severely stressful life events often serve as precipitating factors for unipolar depression (e.g., Hammen, 2005; Monroe & Harkness, 2005; Monroe et al., 2009). This is especially true for young female adults for whom stressful life events are more likely to show a stronger stress-depression relationship than is the case for men (Harkness et al., 2010). Most of the episodic stressful life events involved in precipi- tating depression concern loss of a loved one, serious threats to important close relationships or to one’s occupation, or severe economic or serious health problems (Monroe & Hadjiyannakis, 2002; Monroe et al., 2009). For example, separations through death or divorce are strongly associated with depression, although such losses also tend to precede other disorders such as panic disorder and generalized anxiety (Kendler, Hettema et al., 2003; Kessler et al., 1997). Losses that involve an element of humili- ation can be especially potent. The stress of being the caregiver to a spouse with a debilitating disease such as Alzheimer’s is also known to be associated with the onset of both major depression and generalized anxiety disorder in the caregiver (e.g., Russo et al., 1995). An important distinction has been made between stressful life events that are independent of the person’s behavior and personality ( independent life events , such as losing a job because one’s company is shutting down or having one’s house hit by a hurricane) and events that may have been at least partly gener- ated by the depressed person’s behavior or personality ( depen- dent life events ). For example, people with depression sometimes generate stressful life events through their poor interpersonal problem solving (such as being unable to resolve conflicts with a spouse), which is often associated with depression. The poor problem solving in turn leads to higher levels of interpersonal stress, which in turn leads to further symptoms of depression. Another example of a dependent life event is failing to keep up with routine tasks such as paying bills, which may lead to a variety of troubles. Evidence to date suggests that dependent life events play an even stronger role in the onset of major depres- sion than do independent life events (Hammen, 2005; Kendler et al., 1999a). Research on stress and the onset of depression is compli- cated by the fact that people with depression have a distinctly negative view of themselves and the world around them (Beck, 1967; Clark, Beck, & Alford, 1999). Thus, their own perceptions of stress may result—at least to some extent— from the cognitive symptoms of their disorder rather than cause their disorder (Dohrenwend, 2006; Monroe, 2008; Monroe & Hadjiyannakis, 2002). That is, their pessimistic outlook may lead them to evaluate events as stressful that an independent evaluator (or a friend who is not depressed) would not. Therefore, researchers have developed more sophisticated interview-based measures of life stress that do not rely on the depressed person’s self-report of how stressful an event is and that take into account the biographical con- text of a person’s life. Trained independent raters evaluate what the impact of a particular event would be expected to be for an average person who has experienced this event in these particular life circumstances; the person’s subjective evaluations of stress are not recorded or taken into account in the rating of impact (Monroe, 2008). For example, the stress value of divorce for a woman who has already begun to establish a new relationship would probably not be rated as highly as the divorce of a woman whose husband left her for a younger woman (e.g., Dohrenwend et al., 1995; Monroe & Hadjiyannakis, 2002). There is widespread agreement that conclusions derived from studies using these more sophisti- cated interview-based techniques are more reliable and valid in predicting depressive episodes (e.g., Monroe, 2008; Monroe & Reid, 2008; Uher & McGuffin, 2010). Several recent reviews of studies that employed these sophisticated measurements of life stress show that severely stressful episodic life events play a causal role (most often within a month or so after the event) in about 20 to 50 percent of cases (e.g., Hammen, 2005; Kendler, Kessler et al., 2010; Monroe & Harkness, 2005). Moreover, people with depression who have experienced a stressful life event tend to show more severe depressive symptoms than those who have not experienced a stressful life event (Monroe & Hadjiyannakis, 2002). This relationship between severely stressful life events and depression is much stronger in people who are having their first onset than in those undergoing recurrent episodes (e.g., Kendler et al., 2000; Monroe & Harkness, 2005). Indeed, Monroe and Harkness (2005) estimated that about 70 percent of people with a first onset of depression have had a recent major stressful life event, whereas only about 40 percent of people with a recurrent episode have had a recent major life event.  Mildly Stressful Events and Chronic Stress   Whether mildly stressful events are also associated with the onset of depression is much more controversial, with conflicting find- ings in the literature. However, studies applying the more sophisticated and complex strategies for assessing life stress have generally not found minor stressful events to be associated with the onset of clinically significant depression (e.g., Dohrenwend et al., 1995; Stueve et al., 1998). An interesting hypothesis has recently been raised that minor events may play more of a role in the onset of recurrent episodes than in the initial episode (Monroe & Harkness, 2005; Monroe et al., 2009). At least one recent study has confirmed this by showing that recurrent epi- sodes are often precipitated by stressful life events of relatively mild impact, which do not tend to be involved in precipitating initial depressive episodes (Stroud et al., 2011). Although the relationship of chronic stress to the onset of depression has not been as thoroughly studied as has the relationship with episodic life events, a number of good
studies have demonstrated that chronic stress is associated with increased risk for the onset, maintenance, and recur- rence of major depression (Hammen, 2005; Monroe et al., 2007). Different studies have used the term   chronic stress   (or  chronic strain   or   difficulties ) in different ways, although it usu- ally refers to one or more forms of stress ongoing for at least several months (e.g., poverty, lasting marital discord, medi- cal problems, having a disabled child). One well-validated chronic stress interview assesses chronic stress in 8 to 10 different domains (e.g., intimate relationships, close friends, family relationships, health of self and family members, etc.; Hammen, 2005).  vulnerability and responses to Stressors   It is impor- tant to keep in mind that there are important individual dif- ferences in how people respond to the experiences of episodic or chronic life stress. For example, women (and perhaps men) at genetic risk for depression not only experience more stress- ful life events (Kendler et al., 1999a; Kendler & Karkowski- Shuman, 1997) but also are more sensitive to them (Kendler, Kessler et al., 1995; Kendler, Kessler et al., 2010). In one large study, women at genetic risk were three times more likely than those not at genetic risk to respond to severely stressful life events with depression (a good example of a genotype–environment interaction). Conversely, those at low genetic risk for depression are less vulnerable to the effects of major stressors (e.g., Caspi et al., 2003; Kendler, Kessler et al., 1995, 2010). In addition to genetic variables, there are a host of other psychological and social variables that may make some people more vulnerable, and other people less vulnerable, to developing depression after experiencing one or more stressful life events (e.g., see Brown & Harris, 1978, for a classic landmark study). In the past 25 years, many researchers have sought to determine which vulnerability and protective factors are most powerful in predicting onset and maintenance of depression.  DiFFErENT TyPES OF vuLNErABiLiTiES FOr uNiPOLAr DEPrESSiON   The range of psychological vulnerabilities that have been studied includes personality traits, negative styles of thinking about the world and one’s experiences, early childhood adversity, and lack of social support.  Personality and Cognitive Diatheses   Researchers have concluded that neuroticism is the primary personality variable that serves as a vulnerability factor for depression (and anxiety disorders as well; for reviews, see Clark, Watson, & Mineka, 1994; Klein et al., 2009; Kotov et al., 2010; see also Lahey, 2009; Zinbarg et al., 2011). Recall that   neuroticism , or   negative affectivity , refers to a stable and heritable personality trait that involves a temperamental sensitivity to negative stimuli. Thus, people who have high levels of this trait are prone to experienc- ing a broad range of negative moods, including not only sadness but also anxiety, guilt, and hostility. Moreover, several studies have also shown that neuroticism predicts the occurrence of more stressful life events, which (as already discussed) frequently lead to depression (e.g., Kendler, Gardner, & Prescott, 2003; Uliaszek et al., 2012). In addition to serving as a vulnerability factor, neuroticism is associated with a worse prognosis for complete recovery from depression. Finally, some researchers attribute sex differences in depression to sex differences in neu- roticism (e.g., Kendler et al., 2002; Sutin et al., 2010). There is some more limited evidence that high levels of introversion (or low positive affectivity) may also serve as vulner- ability factors for depression, either alone or when combined with neuroticism (e.g., Gershuny & Sher, 1998; Watson et al., 2005). Positive affectivity involves a disposition to feel joyful, energetic, bold, proud, enthusiastic, and confident; people low on this disposition tend to feel unenthusiastic, unenergetic, dull, flat, and bored. It is therefore not surprising that this might make them more prone to developing clinical depression, although the evidence for this is very mixed. The cognitive diatheses that have been studied for depres- sion generally focus on particular negative patterns of think- ing that make people who are prone to depression more likely to become depressed when faced with one or more stressful life events. For example, people who attribute negative events to internal, stable, and global causes may be more prone to becoming depressed than are people who attribute the same events to external, unstable, and specific causes (e.g., Abramson et al., 1978; Abramson et al., 1989; Abramson et al., 2002). A pessimistic or depressive attribution for receiving a low grade in an exam might be, “I’m stupid,” whereas a more optimistic attribution for the same event might be, “The teacher delib- erately wrote a difficult test to make us all realize we need to study harder.”  If a woman living in poverty is already genetically at risk for depression, the stresses associated with living in poverty may be especially likely to precipitate a major depression in her.
Early Adversity as a Diathesis   A range of adversities in the early environment (such as family turmoil, parental psycho- pathology, physical or sexual abuse, and other forms of intrusive, harsh, and coercive parenting) can create both a short-term and a long-term vulnerability to depression. Such factors operate, at least in part, by increasing an individual’s sensitivity to stress- ful life events in adulthood, with similar findings having been observed in animals (e.g., Gunnar & Quevedo, 2007; Harkness & Lumley, 2008; Slavich et al., 2011). The long-term effects of such early environmental adversities may be mediated by both biological variables (such as alterations in the regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary stress response system) and psychological variables (such as lower self-esteem, insecure attachment relation- ships, difficulty relating to peers, and pessimistic attributions; e.g., Goodman & Brand, 2009; Harkness & Lumley, 2008). However, it is also important to realize that certain individu- als who have undergone early adversity remain resilient, and if the exposure to early adversity is moderate rather than severe a form of stress inoculation may occur that makes the individual less susceptible to the effects of later stress (e.g., Parker et al., 2004). These stress-inoculation effects seem to be mediated by strengthening socioemotional and neuroendocrine resistance to subsequent stressors.  Summary   As we have discussed, several different types of biological and psychological diatheses for unipolar depression have been studied, and some of these have been formulated as diathesis-stress theories, as we review in the following sections. Nevertheless it is important to keep in mind that these theories of vulnerability are not mutually exclusive, and some may simply be describing the same diathesis in different terms or at differ- ent levels of analysis. For example, there is a moderately strong genetic basis for neuroticism, and neuroticism is strongly corre- lated with pessimism (Clark, Watson, & Mineka, 1994; Zinbarg et al., 2010; Zinbarg et al., 2013), so these proposed diatheses are clearly somewhat interrelated. Moreover, dysfunctional early parenting, emotional abuse, and parental loss have been strongly implicated in the formation of some of the other cognitive dia- theses (Alloy et al., 2004; Bowlby, 1980; Goodman & Brand, 2009). Thus, these two proposed diatheses may simply differ in whether they operate distally (poor early parenting) or proxi- mally (negative thinking patterns) in contributing to vulnerabil- ity for depression. We now turn to five major psychological theories of depres- sion that have received much attention over the years.  PSyChODyNAMiC ThEOriES   In his classic paper “Mourning and Melancholia” (1917), Freud noted the important similarity between the symptoms of clinical depression and the symptoms seen in people mourning the loss of a loved one. Freud and a colleague, Karl Abraham (1927), both hypothesized that when a loved one dies the mourner regresses to the oral stage of develop- ment (when the infant cannot distinguish self from others) and introjects or incorporates the lost person, feeling all the same feelings toward the self as toward the lost person. These feelings were thought to include anger and hostility because Freud be- lieved that we unconsciously hold negative feelings toward those we love, in part because of their power over us. This is what led to the psychodynamic idea that depression is anger turned inward. Freud hypothesized that depression could also occur in response to imagined or symbolic losses. For example, a student who fails in school or who fails at a romantic relationship may experience this symbolically as a loss of his or her parents’ love. Later psychodynamic theorists proposed a number of vari- ants on Freud and Abraham’s early psychodynamic theories (see Levy & Wasserman, 2009, for a brief summary). Perhaps the most important contribution of the psychodynamic approaches to depression has been their noting the importance of loss (both real and symbolic or imagined) to the onset of depression and noting the striking similarities between the symptoms of mourn- ing and the symptoms of depression (Bowlby, 1980). Even theorists who disagree with many of the specific details of these theories recognize that their own theories must account for these basic observations.  BEhAviOrAL ThEOriES   In the 1970s and 1980s, several theorists in the behavioral tradition developed behavioral theories of depression, proposing that people become depressed either when their responses no longer produce positive reinforcement or when their rate of negative experiences increases (such as when experiencing stressful life events; e.g., Ferster, 1974; Lewinsohn, 1974; Lewinsohn & Gotlib, 1995; Lewinsohn et al., 1985). Such theories are consistent with research showing that people with depression do indeed receive fewer positive verbal and social reinforcements from their families and friends than do people who are not depressed and also experience more negative events. Moreover, they have lower activity levels, and their moods seem to vary with both their positive and their negative experiences rates (see Lewinsohn & Gotlib, 1995; Martell, 2009). Never- theless, although such findings are consistent with behavioral theories, they do not show that depression is   caused   by these factors. Instead, it may be that some of the primary symptoms  Children who have lost a parent through death or permanent separation may become vulnerable to depression if they receive poor subsequent care from another parent or guardian and if their environment and rou- tine are disrupted.
of depression, such as pessimism and low levels of energy, cause the person with depression to experience lower rates of reinforce- ment, which in turn may help maintain the depression. For this and other reasons, behavioral theories of the causes of depression are no longer very influential. However, as discussed later, there is exciting new research demonstrating that a novel form of behav- ioral treatment inspired by these behavioral theories—behavioral activation treatment—seems to be a very effective way to treat depression (Dimidjian et al., 2011; Martell, 2009).  BECk’S COGNiTivE ThEOry   Since 1967 one of the most influential theories of depression has been that of Aaron Beck (b. 1921), a psychiatrist who became disenchanted with psycho- dynamic theories of depression early in his career and developed his own cognitive theory of depression (e.g., Beck, 1967; Clark, Beck, & Alford, 1999). Whereas the most prominent symptoms of depression have generally been considered to be the affective or mood symptoms, Beck hypothesized that the cognitive symp- toms of depression often precede and cause the affective or mood symptoms rather than vice versa (see Figure 7.3). For example, if you think that you are a failure or that you are ugly, it would not be surprising for those thoughts to lead to a depressed mood. Beck’s theory, a diathesis-stress theory in which negative cognitions are central, has become somewhat more elaborate over the years while still retaining its primary tenets (e.g., Beck, 1967, 1983; Clark & Beck, 2010). First, there are the underlying dys- functional beliefs, known as   depressogenic schemas , which are rigid, extreme, and counterproductive. An example of a dysfunc- tional belief (that a person is usually not consciously aware of) is, “If everyone doesn’t love me, then my life is worthless.” Accord- ing to cognitive theory, such a belief would predispose the person holding it to develop depression if he or she perceived social rejec- tion. Alternatively, a person with the dysfunctional belief, “If I’m not perfectly successful, then I’m a nobody” would be vulnerable to developing negative thoughts and depressed mood if she or he felt like a failure. Note that Beck did not maintain that simply having these   dysfunctional beliefs   is sufficient to make someone depressed; instead, he maintained that these dysfunctional beliefs need to be activated by the occurrence of some form of stress (e.g., perceiving social rejection or feeling like a failure). These depression-producing beliefs or schemas are thought to develop during childhood and adolescence as a function of nega- tive experiences with parents and significant others, and they are thought to serve as the underlying diathesis, or vulnerability, to developing depression (Beck, 1967; Ingram et al., 2006; Morley & Moran, 2011). Although they may lie dormant for years in the absence of significant stressors, when dysfunctional beliefs are acti- vated by current stressors or depressed mood, they tend to fuel the current thinking pattern, creating a pattern of   negative automatic thoughts —thoughts that often occur just below the surface of awareness and involve unpleasant, pessimistic predictions. These pessimistic predictions tend to center on the three themes of what Beck calls the   negative cognitive triad : (1) negative thoughts about the self (“I’m ugly”; “I’m worthless”; “I’m a failure”); (2) negative thoughts about one’s experiences and the surrounding world (“No one loves me”; “People treat me badly”); and (3) negative thoughts about one’s future (“It’s hopeless because things will always be this way”; Clark, Beck, & Alford, 1999; see Figure 7.4 on p. 231). Beck also postulated that the negative cognitive triad tends to be maintained by a variety of negative cognitive biases or errors (see also Scher et al., 2005). Each of these involves biased process- ing of negative self-relevant information. Examples include:  •   Dichotomous or all-or-none reasoning , which involves a ten- dency to think in extremes. For example, someone might dis- count a less-than-perfect performance by saying, “If I can’t get it 100 percent right, there’s no point in doing it at all.”  •   Selective abstraction , which involves a tendency to focus on one negative detail of a situation while ignoring other ele- ments of the situation. Someone might say, “I didn’t have a moment of pleasure or fun today” not because this is true but because he or she selectively remembers only the negative things that happened.  Formation of dysfunctional beliefs Early experience Critical incident(s) Symptoms of depression Beliefs activated Negative automatic thoughts Behavioral Affective Motivational   Cognitive Somatic  Depression  figure   7.3  Beck’s Cognitive Model of Depression.   According to Beck’s cognitive model of depression, certain kinds of early experiences can lead to the formation of dysfunctional assumptions that leave a person vulnerable to depression later in life if certain critical incidents (stressors) activate those assumptions. Once activated, these dysfunctional assumptions trigger au- tomatic thoughts that in turn produce depressive symptoms, which further fuel the depressive automatic thoughts. (Adapted from Fennell, 1989.)
•   Arbitrary inference , which involves jumping to a conclusion based on minimal or no evidence. A depressed person might say, after an initial homework assignment from a cognitive therapist did not work, “This therapy will never work for me.” (Examples from Fennell, 1989, p. 193) It is easy to see how each of these cognitive distortions tends to maintain the negative cognitive triad. That is, if the content of your thoughts regarding your views of your self, your world, and your future is already negative and you tend to minimize the good things that happen to you or draw negative conclusions based on minimal evidence, those negative thoughts are not likely to disappear. In addition, just as the underlying dysfunc- tional beliefs (such as, “If everybody doesn’t love me, then my life is worthless”) elicit the negative cognitive triad when acti- vated, so too does the negative thinking produced by the nega- tive triad serve to reinforce those underlying beliefs. Thus each of these components of cognitive theory serves to reinforce the oth- ers, as shown in Figure 7.3 on p. 230. Moreover, these negative thoughts can produce some of the other symptoms of depression such as sadness, dejection, and lack of motivation.  Evaluating Beck’s Theory as a Descriptive Theory  Over the past 35 years, an enormous amount of research has been conducted to test various aspects of Beck’s theory. As we will see, it has generated a very effective form of treatment for depression known as cognitive therapy. In addition, it has been well supported as a descriptive theory that explains many prominent characteristics of depres- sion (e.g., D. A. Clark, Beck, & Alford, 1999; Haaga et al., 1991). Patients with depression of all the subtypes are considerably more negative in their thinking, especially about themselves or issues highly relevant to the self, than are persons who are not depressed and they are also more negative than they usually are when they are not depressed. Moreover, persons with depression do think more negatively about themselves and the world around them, especially their own personal world, than do persons who are not depressed, and are quite nega- tive about the future, especially their own future (the negative cognitive triad). By contrast, people who are not depressed show a tendency to process emotional information in an overly optimistic, self- enhancing manner, which may serve as a protective factor against depression (Mezulis et al., 2004). Beck’s theory originally proposed that stressors are necessary to activate depressogenic schemas or dys- functional beliefs that lie dormant between episodes, but more recent research has shown that stressors are not necessary to activate the latent depressive schemas between episodes. Indeed, simply inducing a depressed mood (e.g., through listening to sad music or recalling sad memories) in an individual who was previously depressed (that is, at risk) is generally sufficient to activate latent depressogenic schemas (e.g., Ingram et al., 2006; LeMoult et al., 2009; Scher et al., 2005). In addition to evidence for dysfunctional beliefs and nega- tive automatic thoughts, there is also considerable evidence for certain cognitive biases for negative self-relevant information in depression. For example, people with depression show better or biased recall of negative information and negative autobiographi- cal memories, whereas people who are not depressed tend to show biased recall of positive emotional information and positive autobiographical memories (Gotlib & Joormann, 2010; Hertel & Brozovich, 2010; Mathews & MacLeod, 2005; Mineka et al., 2003). In addition, people with depression are more likely than people who are not depressed to draw negative conclusions that go beyond the information presented in a scenario and to under- estimate the positive feedback they have received (D. A. Clark, Beck, & Alford, 1999). It is easy to see how, if one is already depressed, remembering primarily the bad things that have hap- pened is likely to maintain or exacerbate the depression. Teasdale (1988, 1996) aptly called this the “vicious cycle of depression.”  Evaluating the Causal Aspects of Beck’s Theory   Although research supports most of the descriptive aspects of Beck’s theory, research directed toward confirming the causal hypotheses of Beck’s theory has yielded more mixed results. The causal hypotheses are usually tested with some kind  "I'm ugly/ worthless/ a failure." "No one loves me." "It's all hopeless because things will always be this way."  The Self The World The Future  figure   7.4  Negative Cognitive Triad.   Beck’s cognitive model of depression describes a pattern of negative automatic thoughts. These pessimistic predictions center on three themes: the self, the world, and the future.
of prospective study design. People who are not depressed are tested for their cognitive vulnerability (usually, dysfunctional beliefs) at Time 1 and then are followed for 1 or more months or years, after which measurements of life stress are adminis- tered. Only some studies have found that dysfunctional beliefs or attitudes at Time 1, in interaction with stressful life events, predict depression at Time 2. However, some of the studies that yielded negative results may have used inadequate study designs. Several more recent studies using more adequate designs have found results quite supportive of the causal aspects of Beck’s theory (e.g., Hankin et al., 2004; Lewinsohn et al., 2001). For example, Lewinsohn and colleagues (2001) assessed about 1,500 adolescents for their dysfunctional beliefs or attitudes and then followed them for 1 year, at which point stressful life events during that year were assessed. Results indicated that those who had started with high levels of dysfunctional beliefs and who experienced high stress were more likely to develop major depression than those with low stress or than those with low dysfunctional beliefs and high stress. Another study with a large community sample of 700 women (average age was 41) also found that dysfunctional beliefs at the outset of a 3-year follow-up period predicted new onsets and recurrences of major depressive episodes over the next 3 years (Otto et al., 2007). However, unlike in the Lewinsohn, Joiner, and Rohde (2001) study, there was no evidence in the Otto and colleagues study for a diathesis-stress interaction, and dysfunctional beliefs did not have additional predictive value beyond that afforded by knowing a prior history of the person’s depressive episodes. Thus, because of inconsistencies in results across studies, more research is still needed to fully assess the causal aspects of Beck’s cognitive theory of depression.  ThE hELPLESSNESS AND hOPELESSNESS ThEOriES OF DEPrESSiON   Whereas Beck’s theory grew out of his clinical observations and research on the pervasive patterns of nega- tive thinking seen in depressed patients, the learned helpless- ness theory of depression originated out of observations in an animal research laboratory. Martin Seligman (1974, 1975) first proposed that the laboratory phenomenon known as   learned helplessness   might provide a useful animal model of depres- sion. In the late 1960s, Seligman and his colleagues (Maier et al., 1969; Overmier & Seligman, 1967) noted that laboratory dogs who were first exposed to uncontrollable shocks later acted in a passive and helpless manner when they were in a situation where they could control the shocks. In contrast, animals first exposed to equal amounts of controllable shocks had no trouble learning to control the shocks. Seligman and his colleagues (e.g., Maier et al., 1969; Overmier & Seligman, 1967) developed the learned help- lessness hypothesis to explain these effects. It states that when animals or humans find that they have no control over aversive events (such as shock), they may learn that they are helpless, which makes them unmotivated to try to respond in the future. Instead they exhibit passivity and even depres- sive symptoms. They are also slow to learn that any response they do make is effective, which may parallel the negative cognitive set in human depression. Seligman’s observations that the animals looked depressed captured his attention and ultimately led to his proposing a learned helplessness model of depression (Seligman, 1974, 1975). Subsequent research demonstrated that helpless animals also show other depressive symptoms such as lower levels of aggression, loss of appetite and weight, and changes in monoamine neurotransmitter levels. After demonstrating that learned helplessness also occurs in humans (e.g., Hiroto & Seligman, 1975), he went on to propose that learned helplessness may underlie some types of human depression. That is, people undergoing stress- ful life events over which they have little or no control may develop a syndrome like the helplessness syndrome seen in animals.  The reformulated helplessness Theory   Some of the research with humans on helplessness soon led to a major refor- mulation of the helplessness theory, addressing some of the complexities of what humans do when faced with uncontrol- lable events (Abramson et al., 1978). In particular, Abramson and colleagues proposed that when people (probably unlike animals) are exposed to uncontrollable negative events, they ask themselves why, and the kinds of   attributions   that people make are, in turn, central to whether they become depressed. These investigators proposed three critical dimensions on which attributions are made: (1) internal/external, (2) global/specific, and (3) stable/unstable. They proposed that a depressogenic or pessimistic attribution for a negative event is an internal, stable, and global one. For example, if your boyfriend treats you badly and you conclude that “It’s because I’m ugly and boring,” you are much more likely to become depressed than if you conclude that “It’s because he’s in a bad mood today and he is taking it out on me.” Abramson and colleagues (1978) proposed that people who have a relatively stable and consistent   pessimistic attributional style   have a vulnerability or diathesis for depression when faced with uncontrollable negative life events. This kind of cognitive style seems to develop, at least in part, through social learning (Alloy, Abramson, & Smith, 2006). For example, children may learn this cognitive style by observing and modeling inferences made by their parents. Alternatively or additionally, the parents may communicate their own inferences about negative events happening to their children, or engage in generally negative parenting practices such as high levels of negative psychological control (criticism, intrusiveness, and guilt) as well as a lack of warmth and caring. This   reformulated helplessness theory   led to a great deal of research. Many studies demonstrated that depressed people do indeed have this kind of pessimistic attributional style, but of course this does not mean that pessimistic attributional style
plays a causal role (e.g., Abramson et al., 1995; Buchanan & Seligman, 1995). Using designs similar to those used to test the causal aspects of cognitive theory, many studies have examined the ability of a pessimistic attributional style to predict the onset of depression in interaction with negative life events (Abramson et al., 1989; Alloy et al., 2008). Some results have supported this theory and some have not. The helplessness theory has been used to explain sex differ- ences in depression. This theory proposes that by virtue of their roles in society, women are more prone to experiencing a sense of lack of control over negative life events. These feelings of helpless- ness might stem from poverty, discrimination in the workplace leading to unemployment or underemployment, the relative imbalance of power in many heterosexual relationships, high rates of sexual and physical abuse against women (either currently or in childhood), role overload (e.g., being a working wife and mother), and less perceived control over traits that men value when choos- ing a long-term mate, such as beauty, thinness, and youth (e.g., Heim et al., 2000; Ben Hamida et al., 1998; Nolen-Hoeksema & Hilt, 2009). There is at least some evidence that each of these con- ditions is associated with higher-than-expected rates of depression, although whether the effects involve a sense of helplessness has not yet been established (Brems, 1995; Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 1999; Whiffen & Clark, 1997). Combining the neuroticism theory with the helplessness theory, it is important to note that there is evi- dence that people who are high on neuroticism are more sensitive to the effects of adversity relative to those low on neuroticism (a genotype–environment interaction; Kendler et al., 2004; Lahey, 2009). So given that women have higher levels of neuroticism and experience more uncontrollable stress, the increased prevalence of depression in women becomes less surprising.  The hopelessness Theory of Depression   A further revision of this theory, known as the   hopelessness theory , was later presented (Abramson et al., 1989; see Alloy et al., 2008). Abramson and colleagues (1989) propose that having a pessimistic attributional style in conjunction with one or more negative life events was not sufficient to produce depression unless one first experienced a state of hopelessness. A hopelessness expectancy was defined by the perception that one had no control over what was going to happen and by the absolute certainty that an important bad outcome was going to occur or that a highly desired good outcome was not going to occur. They also proposed that the internal/external dimension of attributions was not important to depression. Instead, they propose two other dimensions of pes- simistic attributional style as being important components of this cognitive diathesis. Specifically, they propose that depression- prone individuals not only tend to make global and stable attribu- tions for negative events but also tend to make negative inferences about other likely negative consequences of the event (e.g., that this means more bad things will also happen) and negative infer- ences about the implications of the event for the self-concept (e.g., that one is unworthy or deficient; Abramson et al., 2002). Research over the past 25 years has been testing this theory. A major longitudinal prospective study of several hundred college students who were hypothesized to be at high risk for unipolar depression (because they had both a pessimistic attri- butional style and high levels of dysfunctional beliefs) has begun to yield evidence quite supportive of some of the major tenets of the hopelessness theory (e.g., Abramson et al., 2002; Alloy, Abramson,Whitehouse et al., 2006; Alloy et al., 2008). For example, in a 2.5-year follow-up period, students in the high-risk group who had never previously been depressed at the outset of the study were about four times more likely (16.2 percent versus 3.6 percent) to develop a first episode of major depression (or comorbid depression and anxiety) than those in the low-risk group. For those who had already had a previous episode of depression prior to entry into the study, the high-risk group was about three times more likely to experience a recurrent episode of major depression in the 2.5-year follow-up period. Additional support for the hopelessness theory has been accumulating as well. Several smaller studies with similar designs to the investigation of Alloy, Abramson, and colleagues have shown evidence for the interaction of cognitive vulnerability with life stress in predicting depressive symptoms and onset of diagnosable depression (Hankin et al., 2004), although oth- ers have not (see Alloy et al., 2008). Furthermore, research has begun to integrate hopelessness theory with a motivational theory of depression that posits that depression is associated with decreased approach behavior (e.g., Nusslock et al., 2011). Specifically, some researchers have hypothesized that cognitively vulnerable individuals are at risk for decreased approach-related behavior as a result of increased hopelessness under stress, thereby contributing to depression. There is at least initial empirical support for this notion. For example, in one investiga- tion of undergraduate students, cognitive vulnerability interacted with life stress to predict a decrease in goal-directed behavior, which was then associated with higher levels of depressive symp- toms (Haeffel et al., 2008). Furthermore, this predictive relation- ship between cognitive vulnerability and stress with goal-directed behavior was mediated by increased feelings of hopelessness. Additional tests of the hopelessness theory and its predictions are needed, but future research on the hopelessness theory is likely to continue to provide important insights into psychosocial causes of depression.  The ruminative response Styles Theory of Depression   Nolen-Hoeksema’s ruminative response style cognitive theory of depression (e.g., 1991, 2000, 2012; Nolen- Hoeksema & Hilt, 2009) focuses on different kinds of responses that people have when they experience feelings and symptoms of sadness and distress, and how their differing response styles affect the course of their depressed feelings. Specifically, when some people have such feelings, they tend to focus intently on how they feel and why they feel that way—a process called  rumination , which involves a pattern of repetitive and relatively
passive mental activity. Other people, by contrast, have a more action-oriented or problem-solving response to such feelings and, for example, distract themselves with another activity or actually try to do something that will solve the problems that are leading to the sadness and distress. Research by Nolen-Hoeksema and colleagues has consistently shown that there are stable individual differences in the tendency to ruminate and that people who ruminate a great deal tend to have more lengthy periods of depressive symptoms. They are also more likely to develop full-blown episodes of major depressive disorder (Nolen-Hoeksema, 2000; Nolen-Hoeksema & Hilt, 2009). Interestingly, it seems that women are more likely than men to ruminate when they become depressed (Nolen-Hoeksema & Corte, 2004; Nolen-Hoeksema & Aldao, 2011). Moreover, self-focused rumination leads to increased recall of more negative autobiographical memories, thereby feeding a vicious circle of depression (Hertel & Brozovich, 2010; Lyubomirsky et al., 1998; Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 2008). The importance of these sex differences in rumination is underscored when we consider that when gender differences in rumination are statistically con- trolled, gender differences in depression are no longer significant (Nolen-Hoeksema & Hilt, 2009). Men, by contrast, are more likely to engage in a distract- ing activity (or consume alcohol) when they get in a depressed mood, and distraction seems to reduce depression (Nolen-Hoek- sema & Corte, 2004; Nolen-Hoeksema, 2012; Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 2008). Distraction might include going to a movie, play- ing a sport, or avoiding thinking about why they are depressed. The origin of these sex differences in response to depression is unclear, but if further research supports this hypothesis it would certainly suggest that effective prevention efforts might include teaching girls to seek distraction rather than to ruminate as a response to depression. The ruminative response styles theory of depression has been integrated with the two previously discussed cognitive the- ories of depression. For example, research reviewed recently by Alloy, Abramson, and colleagues (2008) shows that for people with high levels of dysfunctional attitudes and/or pessimistic attributional styles, their tendencies to ruminate moderated the effects of the negative cognitive styles on increasing vulnerabil- ity to depression. Specifically, those who had negative cognitive styles who also tended to ruminate a lot were most likely to develop depressive episodes. The researchers suggest that people with negative cognitive styles have a lot of negative content to their thoughts but that only if they dwell on this and brood about it (high ruminators) are they especially likely to develop clinical depression (see also Robinson & Alloy, 2003).  Comorbidity of Anxiety and Mood Disorders   The issue of whether depression and anxiety can be differentiated in a reliable and valid way has received a good deal of attention over the years. Only in the past two decades, however, have researchers begun to make significant advances in understanding the real scope of the problem. The overlap between measures of depression and anxiety occurs at all levels of analysis: patient self- report, clinician ratings, diagnosis, and family and genetic factors (Clark & Watson, 1991; Mineka et al., 1998; Watson, 2005). That is, persons who rate themselves high on symptoms of anxi- ety also tend to rate themselves high on symptoms of depression, and clinicians rating these same individuals do the same thing. The overlap also occurs at the diagnostic level. One review of the literature estimated that just over half of the patients who receive a diagnosis of a mood disorder also receive a diagnosis of an anxiety disorder at some point in their lives, and vice versa (e.g., Hettema, 2008; Mineka et al., 1998; Watson, 2005). Finally, there is considerable evidence from genetic and fam- ily studies of the close relationship between anxiety and unipolar depressive disorders (Garber & Weersing, 2010; Kendler, 1996; Mineka et al., 1998). Several very large twin studies and an impor- tant review have shown that liability for unipolar depression and liability for generalized anxiety disorder come from the same genetic factors, and which disorder develops is a result of what environmen- tal experiences occur (Kendler, 1996; Watson, 2005). The genetic relationships between panic disorder and depression and between the other anxiety disorders and depression are more modest (Kend- ler, Walters et al., 1995; Mineka et al., 1998). The shared genetically based factor among these disorders seems to be at least in part the personality trait of neuroticism—a major risk factor for all of these disorders (Hettema, 2008; Watson et al., 2006; Zinbarg, Mineka et al., 2013). At present the dominant theoretical approach to the over- lap between depressive and anxiety symptoms is to assume that most of the measures used to assess both sets of symptoms tap  Woman are more likely than men to ruminate when they are depressed. Men, in con- trast, tend to engage in distracting activities when they get into a depressed mood.
the broad mood and personality dimension of negative affect, which includes affective states such as distress, anger, fear, guilt, and worry (Clark, Watson, & Mineka, 1994; Griffith et al., 2010; Watson et al., 2006). Depressed and anxious individuals cannot be differentiated on the basis of their high level of nega- tive affect. But these researchers have also shown that anxiety and depression can be distinguished from one another on the basis of a second dimension of mood and personality known as positive affect, which includes affective states such as excite- ment, delight, interest, and pride. Depressed persons tend to be characterized by low levels of positive affect, but anxious indi- viduals usually are not (with the exception of people with social phobia; Watson et al., 2006; Naragon-Gainey et al., 2009). That is, only depressed individuals show the signs of fatigue and lack of energy and enthusiasm characteristic of low positive affect. A number of investigators have also shown that some anxious people (especially panic patients), but not depressed people, tend to be characterized by high levels of yet another mood dimension known as anxious hyperarousal, symptoms of which include racing heart, trembling, dizziness, and shortness of breath. This tripartite model of anxiety and depression thus explains what features anxiety and depression share (high negative affect) and what features they differ on (low positive affect for depression and anxious hyperarousal for panic; Mineka et al., 1998). Each of the other anxiety disorders has its own separate and relatively unique component as well (Barlow, 2002; Mineka et al., 1998; Prenoveau et al., 2010; Watson, 2005; see also Watson et al., 2007, for another variant on this approach). Several aspects of the comorbidity between anxiety and mood disorders at the diagnostic level raise interesting questions about what common and what distinct causal factors may exist. For example, there is usually a sequential relationship between the symptoms of anxiety and depression, both within an episode and between episodes. Bowlby (1973, 1980) describes a biphasic response to separation and loss in which agitation and anxiety are followed by despair and depression. And across a lifetime,  developments in rESEarCh  Why Do Sex Differences in Unipolar Depression Emerge During Adolescence?  I t is interesting to consider why the sex difference in de- pression starts in adolescence (Essau et al., 2010; Hankin & Abramson, 2001; Hankin et al., 2008), beginning between ages 12 and 13 and reaching its most dramatic peak between ages 14 and 16, although it is actually more tied to pubertal status than to age per se (Becker et al., 2007; Conley & Rudolph, 2009; Sanborn & Hayward, 2003). This is a time of rapid physi- ological, environmental, and psychological changes known to create turmoil for many adolescents, but why are adolescent females more likely to become depressed? Hankin, Abramson, and colleagues (Hankin & Abramson, 2001; Hankin et al., 2008) have proposed an intriguing cognitive vulnerability-stress model of the development of gender differences during adolescence. Building on ideas from the reformulated helplessness and hopelessness models of depression for adults, they summarize research indicating that children and adolescents, like adults, are prone to experiencing increases in depressive symptoms if they have a pessimistic attributional style and experience stress- ful life events (e.g., Hankin & Abramson, 2001; Hankin, 2006). Moreover, during early adolescence, gender differences in attri- butional style, in rumination, and in stressful life events emerge such that girls tend to have a more pessimistic attributional style, to show more rumination, and to experience more nega- tive life events (especially interpersonal events; Rudolph, 2009). Thus one can see how, with all three of these risk factors show- ing gender differences in adolescence, a synergistic effect might lead to the dramatic rise in depression in adolescent girls. More- over, Hankin and Abramson (2001; see also Hankin et al., 2008) review evidence that the experience of negative life events may contribute to greater cognitive vulnerability, which in turn further increases susceptibility to depressive symptoms. Further- more, depressive symptoms in adolescent girls, as in adults, are likely to result in more dependent life stress being generated, which in turn may exacerbate depression (Liu & Alloy, 2010; Rudolph, 2009). Finally, girls not only experience more negative life events than boys but also encode them in greater detail and show better memory for emotional events (though not for non- emotional events). Hankin and Abramson (2001) also emphasized the role of negative cognitions about attractiveness and body image in the emergence of sex differences in depression during adoles- cence. There is evidence that the development of secondary sexual characteristics is harder psychologically for girls than for boys. Body dissatisfaction goes up for females at this time, and down for males; moreover, body dissatisfaction is more closely related to self-esteem for girls than for boys. Much of girls’ dis- satisfaction with their bodies comes from their realization of the discrepancy between our society’s ideal of a thin, prepubescent body shape for females and the fact that they are gaining fat as they mature sexually. Hankin and Abramson (2001) summarized evidence that girls are more likely than boys to make pessimistic attributions and other negative inferences about negative events that may occur (such as negative remarks) related to the domain of physical attractiveness. Given that physical attractiveness may be more motivationally significant for girls than for boys, it becomes plausible that this may be one important factor that makes depression especially likely in adolescent girls.
individuals are more likely to experience an anxiety disorder first and a depressive disorder later (T. A. Brown et al., 2001; Garber & Weersing, 2010; Merikangas et al., 2003).  iNTErPErSONAL EFFECTS OF MOOD DiSOrDErS   Al- though there is no interpersonal theory of depression that is as clearly articulated as the cognitive theories, there has been a considerable amount of research on interpersonal factors in depression. Interpersonal problems and social-skills deficits may well play a causal role in at least some cases of depression. In ad- dition, depression creates many interpersonal difficulties—with strangers and friends as well as with family members (Hammen, 1995, 2005; Joiner & Timmons, 2009; Petit & Joiner, 2006).  Lack of Social Support and Social-Skills Deficits  Brown and Harris (1978), in their classic study of community women in a poor area of inner London, reported that women with- out a close, confiding relationship were more likely than those with at least one close confidant to become depressed if they experienced a severely stressful event. Many more studies have since supported the idea that people who are lonely, socially isolated, or lacking social support are more vulnerable to becoming depressed and that individuals with depression have smaller and less supportive social networks, which tends to precede the onset of depression (e.g., Cacioppo et al., 2006; Gotlib & Hammen, 1992; Ibarra-Rovillard & Kuiper, 2011). In addition, some people with depression have social-skills deficits. For example, they seem to speak more slowly and monotonously and to maintain less eye contact; they are also less skilled than people without depression at solving interpersonal problems (e.g., Ingram et al., 1999; Joiner & Timmons, 2009).  The Effects of Depression on Others   Not only do people with depression have interpersonal problems, but, unfortunately, their own behavior also seems to make these problems worse. For example, the behavior of an individual who is depressed often places others in the position of providing sympathy, support, and care. However, positive reinforcement does not necessarily follow. Depressive behavior can, and over time frequently does, elicit negative feelings (sometimes includ- ing hostility) and rejection in other people, including strangers, roommates, and spouses (Coyne, 1976; Ingram et al., 1999; Joiner & Timmons, 2009). Although these negative feelings may initially make the person who is not depressed feel guilty, which leads to sympathy and support in the short term, ultimately a downwardly spiraling relationship usually results, making the person with depression feel worse (e.g., Joiner, 2002; Joiner & Metalsky, 1995). Social rejection may be especially likely if the person with depression engages in excessive reassurance seeking (e.g., Joiner & Timmons, 2009; Prinstein et al., 2005).  Marriage and Family Life   Interpersonal aspects of depres- sion have also been carefully studied in the context of marital and family relationships. A significant proportion of couples experiencing marital distress have at least one partner with clini- cal depression, and there is a high correlation between marital dissatisfaction and depression for both women and men (e.g., Beach & Jones, 2002; Rehman et al., 2008; Whisman, 2007). In addition, marital distress spells a poor prognosis for a spouse with depression whose symptoms have remitted. That is, a person whose depression clears up is likely to relapse if he or she has an unsatisfying marriage, especially one characterized by high levels of critical and hostile comments from the spouse (Butzlaff & Hooley, 1998; Hooley, 2007). Why should criticism be linked to relapse? One possibility is that criticism perturbs some of the neural circuitry that underlies depression. Moreover,   even after full recovery , criticism may still be a powerful trigger for those who are vulnerable to depression. In a novel study, Hooley and colleagues (2009) exposed healthy (never depressed) controls and women with a past history of depression to critical remarks from their own mothers. While they were lying in a brain scanner, each participant heard her own mother mak- ing personally relevant critical remarks. Even though all the young women in the recovered-depressed group were completely well and had no symptoms of depression, their brains still responded differently from the healthy controls when challenged by criticism. As you can see in Figure 7.5 on page 237, there are differences in several brain areas that, as you have already learned, have been implicated in depression. When they heard criticism from their mothers, the recovered-depressed participants showed less brain activation in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and anterior cin- gulate cortex than the never-depressed controls did. In contrast, during criticism, brain activity in the amygdala was much higher in the recovered-depressed participants than it was in the con- trols. What was especially interesting was that all of this occurred  Why are people without social support networks more prone to depres- sion when faced with major stressors?
without the recovered-depressed subjects being aware that they were responding differently to the criticisms. Taken together, these findings suggest that criticism might be associated with relapse in depression because it is capable of activating some of the neu- ral circuits that are thought to be involved in the disorder. They also suggest that people who are vulnerable to depression may be especially sensitive to criticism even after they have made a full recovery. Marital distress and depression may co-occur because the depressed partner’s behavior triggers negative affect in the spouse. Individuals with depression may also be so preoccupied with themselves that they are not very sensi- tive or responsive to the needs of their spouses. A review by Beach and Jones (2002) adapted Hammen’s (1991) stress- generation model of depression to help explain the two-way relationship between marital discord and depression (that is, marital distress can lead to depression, and depression can lead to marital distress). As noted earlier, a significant amount of the stress that individuals with depression expe- rience is somehow at least partly generated by their own behaviors, but this stress in turn also serves to exacerbate depressive symptoms. The effects of depression in one fam- ily member extend to children of all ages as well. Parental depression puts children at high risk for many problems, but especially for depression (Goodman, 2007; Hammen, 2009; Hammen et al., 2011). Although these effects occur with both fathers and mothers with depression, the effects of maternal depression are somewhat larger (Hammen, 2009). Children of parents with depression who become depressed themselves tend to become depressed earlier and to show a more severe and persistent course than control children who become depressed who do not have a parent with depression (see Hammen, 2009). Some of these effects probably occur because these chil- dren inherit a variety of traits such as temperament (including shyness, behavioral inhibition, and neuroticism), low levels of positive emotions, and poor ability to regulate emotions that are all known risk factors for depression (e.g., Durbin et al., 2005; see Hammen, 2009, for a review). In addition, many studies have documented the damaging effects of nega- tive interactional patterns between mothers with depression and their children. For example, mothers with depression show more friction and have fewer playful, mutually reward- ing interactions with their children (see Goodman & Gotlib, 1999; Murray & Cooper, 1997). They are also less sensitively attuned to their infants and less affirming of their infants’ experiences (Goodman & Brand, 2009). Furthermore, their young children are given multiple opportunities for observa- tional learning of negative cognitions, depressive behavior, and depressed affect. Thus, although genetically determined vulnerability is clearly involved, psychosocial influences clearly also play an important role (Hammen, 2009; Natsuaki et al., 2010), and evidence is accumulating that inadequate parenting is what mediates the association between parental depression and their children’s depression (Goodman, 2007).  in review  •   Summarize the major biological causal factors for unipolar depression, including genetic, biochemical, neuroendocrino- logical, and neurophysiological factors.  •   What is the role of stressful life events in unipolar depression, and what kinds of diatheses have been proposed to interact with them?  •   Describe the following theories of depression: Beck’s cognitive theory, the helplessness and hopelessness theories, ruminative response styles theory, and interpersonal theories.  Bipolar and Related Disorders  As discussed earlier in the chapter,   bipolar disorders   are dis- tinguished from unipolar disorders by the presence of manic or hypomanic episodes, which are nearly always preceded or  3 2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0 3.5 3 2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0 2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0  Dorsolateral PFC   Anterior Cingulate   Amygdala  figure   7.5  Brain Activation in response to Maternal Criticism.   When healthy (never depressed) participants hear criticism from their own mothers they show significantly greater activation in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex than do people who have a history of depression but who are currently fully recovered. Amgygala activation during criticism is significantly greater in for- merly depressed participants than it is in controls. (Hooley et al., 2009.)
followed by periods of depression. A person who experiences a manic episode has a markedly elevated, euphoric, and expan- sive mood, often interrupted by occasional outbursts of intense irritability or even violence—particularly when others refuse to go along with the manic person’s wishes and schemes. These extreme moods must persist for at least a week for this diagnosis to be made. In addition, three or more additional symptoms must occur in the same time period. There must also be signifi- cant impairment of occupational and social functioning, and hospitalization is often necessary during manic episodes. Hypo- manic episodes can also occur; these involve milder versions of the same symptoms and last at least 4 days. Although the symp- toms listed are the same for manic and hypomanic episodes, there is much less impairment in hypomania, and hospitalization is not required.  Cyclothymic Disorder  It has long been recognized that some people are subject to cyclical mood changes less severe than the mood swings seen in bipolar disorder. Historically these were referred to as   cyclothymic temperament   (or   personality ; Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). If such symptoms persist for at least 2 years, the person may receive a diagnosis of   cyclothymic disorder . In   DSM-5 , cyclothymia is defined as a less serious version of full-blown bipolar disorder because it lacks certain extreme symptoms and psychotic features such as delusions and the marked impairment caused by full-blown manic or major depressive episodes. In the depressed phase of cyclothymic disorder, a person’s mood is dejected, and he or she experiences a distinct loss of interest or pleasure in customary activities and pastimes. In addi- tion, the person may show other symptoms such as low energy, feelings of inadequacy, social withdrawal, and a pessimistic, brooding attitude. Essentially, the symptoms are similar to those in someone with dysthymia except without the duration criterion. Symptoms of the hypomanic phase of cyclothymia are essentially the opposite of the symptoms of dysthymia. In this phase of the disorder, the person may become especially creative and productive because of increased physical and mental energy. There may be significant periods between episodes in which the person with cyclothymia functions in a relatively adaptive man- ner. For a diagnosis of cyclothymia (see DSM-5 box), there must be at least a 2-year span during which there are numerous peri- ods with hypomanic and depressed symptoms (1 year for ado- lescents and children), and the symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning (although not as severe as in bipolar disorder). Individuals with cyclothymia are at greatly increased risk of later developing full-blown bipolar I or II disorder (e.g., Akiskal & Pinto, 2009; Goodman & Jamison, 2007). For this reason it is often recommended that they receive clinical attention. The following case illustrates cyclothymia.  A Cyclothymic Car Salesman   A 29-year-old car salesman was referred by his current girlfriend, a psychiatric nurse, who suspected he had a mood disorder even though the patient was reluctant to admit that he might be a “moody” person. According to him, since the age of 14 he has experi- enced repeated alternating cycles that he terms “good times and bad times.” During a “bad” period, usually lasting 4 to 7 days, he sleeps 10 to 14 hours daily [and] lacks energy, confidence, and motivation—“just vegetating,” as he puts it. Often he abruptly shifts, characteristically upon waking up in the morning, to a 3- to 4-day stretch of overconfidence, heightened social awareness, promiscuity, and sharpened  A.   For at least 2 years (at least 1 year in children and ado- lescents) there have been numerous periods with hypo- manic symptoms that do not meet criteria for a hypo- manic episode and numerous periods with depressive symptoms that do not meet criteria for a major depres- sive episode.  B.   During the above 2-year period (1 year in children and adolescents), the hypomanic and depressive periods have been present for at least half the time and the individual has not been without the symptoms for more than 2 months at a time.  C.   Criteria for a major depressive, manic, or hypomanic epi- sode have never been met.  D.   The symptoms in Criterion A are not better explained by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreni- form disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.  E.   The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).  F.   The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impair- ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Cyclothymic Disorder   DSM- 5
thinking—“things would flash in my mind.” At such times he indulges in alcohol to enhance the experience, but also to help him sleep. Occasionally the “good” periods last 7 to 10 days but culminate in irritable and hostile outbursts, which often herald the transition back to another period of “bad” days. . . . In school, A’s and B’s alternated with C’s and D’s, with the result that the patient was considered a bright student whose performance was mediocre overall because of “unstable motiva- tion.” As a car salesman his performance has also been uneven, with “good days” canceling out the “bad days”; yet even dur- ing his “good days” he is sometimes perilously argumentative with customers and loses sales that appeared sure. Although considered a charming man in many social circles, he alienates friends when he is hostile and irritable. . . . (Spitzer et al., 2002, pp. 155–56)  Bipolar Disorders (I and II)  Although recurrent cycles of mania and melancholia were rec- ognized as early as the sixth century, it remained for Kraepelin, in 1899, to introduce the term   manic-depressive insanity   and to clarify the clinical picture. Kraepelin described the disorder as a series of attacks of elation and depression, with periods of relative normality in between. Today we call this illness bipolar disorder, although the term   manic-depressiv e illness is still commonly used as well.  Bipolar I disorder   is distinguished from major depressive disorder by the presence of mania (see Table 7.2 for a sum- mary). A   mixed episode   is characterized by symptoms of both full-blown manic and major depressive episodes for at least 1 week, whether the symptoms are intermixed or alter- nate rapidly every few days. Such cases were once thought to be relatively rare but have increasingly been recognized as relatively common (e.g., Cassidy et al., 1998; Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). Indeed Goodwin & Jamison’s (2007) review of 18 studies reported that an average of 28 percent of bipolar patients at least occasionally experience mixed states. More- over, many patients in a manic episode have some symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, guilt, and suicidal thoughts, even if these are not severe enough to qualify as a mixed episode. Recent careful longitudinal follow-up of people present- ing with a full-blown mixed episode or even a subthreshold mixed episode has shown that these individuals have a worse long-term outcome than those originally presenting with a depressive or a manic episode (Baldessarini et al., 2010; Dodd et al., 2010).   Watch   the   Video   Ann: Bipolar Disorder   on  MyPsychLab . If a person shows only manic symptoms, it is nevertheless assumed that a bipolar disorder exists and that a depressive epi- sode will eventually occur. Although some researchers have noted the probable existence of a unipolar type of manic disorder (i.e., “pure mania” e.g., Kessler et al., 1997; Solomon et al., 2003), critics of this diagnosis argue that such patients usually have bipolar relatives and may well have had mild depressions that went unrecognized (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Winokur & Tsuang, 1996). The following case illustrates both phases of Bipolar I disorder:  Roller Coaster   When Ernest Eaton’s desperate wife finally got him to agree to a comprehensive inpatient evalua- tion, he was 37, unemployed, and had been essentially non- functional for several years. After a week during which he was partying all night and shopping all day, Mrs. Eaton said she would leave him if he did not check into a psychiatric hospital. The admitting psychiatrist found him to be a fast-talking, jovial, seductive man with no evidence of delusions or hallucinations. Mr. Eaton’s troubles began 7 years before when he . . . had a few months of mild, intermittent depressive symptoms, anxiety, fatigue, insomnia, and loss of appetite, [but] within a few months he was back to his usual self. A few years later . . . after removal of [an asymptomatic] mass . . . Mr. Eaton noted dramatic mood changes. Twenty-five days of remarkable energy, hyperactivity, and euphoria were followed by 5 days of depression during which he  table   7.2  Distinguishing between Bipolar I and Bipolar II Disorder Bipolar I:  •   The most important aspect of bipolar I disorder is the presence  of mania.  •   People with bipolar I disorder experience episodes of mania  and periods of depression. Even if the periods of depression do not reach the threshold for a major depressive episode, the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder is still given.  Bipolar II:  •   People with bipolar II disorder experience periods of hypoma - nia but their symptoms are below the threshold for full-blown mania.  •   The person diagnosed with bipolar II disorder also experiences  periods of depressed mood that meet the criteria for major depression.
slept a lot and felt that he could hardly move. This pattern of alter- nating periods of elation and depression, apparently with few “nor- mal” days, repeated itself continuously over the following years. During his energetic periods, Mr. Eaton was optimistic and self-confident but short tempered and easily irritated. His judg- ment at work was erratic. He spent large sums of money on unnecessary and, for him, uncharacteristic purchases, such as a high-priced stereo system and several Doberman pinschers. He also had several impulsive sexual flings. During his depressed periods, he often stayed in bed all day because of fatigue, lack of motivation, and depressed mood. He felt guilty about the irresponsibilities and excesses of the previous several weeks. He stopped eating, bathing, and shaving. After several days of this withdrawal, Mr. Eaton would rise from bed one morning feeling better and, within 2 days, he would be back at work, often work- ing feverishly, though ineffectively, to catch up on work he had let slide during his depressed periods. Source: Adapted with permission from   DSM-IV-TR Casebook: A Learning Companion to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ,   Fourth Edition,   Text Revision   (Copyright © 2002). American Psychiatric Association.  DSM-5   also identifies a distinct form of bipolar disorder called   bipolar II disorder , in which the person does not experi- ence full-blown manic (or mixed) episodes but has experienced clear-cut hypomanic episodes as well as major depressive epi- sodes (Akiskal & Benazzi, 2005). Bipolar II disorder is equally or somewhat more common than bipolar I disorder, and, when combined, estimates are that about 2 to 3 percent of the U.S. population will suffer from one or the other disorder (e.g., Kessler et al., 2007; Kupfer, 2005). Bipolar II disorder evolves into bipolar I disorder in only about 5 to 15 percent of cases, suggesting that they are distinct forms of the disorder (Coryell et al., 1995; Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). Recently, a subthreshold form of bipolar II disorder has also been recognized as careful study has revealed that as many as 40 percent of individuals diag- nosed with unipolar MDD have a similar number of hypomanic symptoms, although not with a sufficient number or duration to qualify for a full-blown hypomanic episode (Zimmerman et al., 2009). Along with related findings, such results are leading researchers and clinicians to recognize that unipolar MDD is a far more heterogeneous category than previously recognized. Bipolar disorder occurs equally in males and females (although depressive episodes are more common in women than men) and usually starts in adolescence and young adulthood, with an average age of onset of 18 to 22 years (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Merikangas et al., 2007). Bipolar II disorder has an average age of onset approximately 5 years later than bipolar I disorder (Baldessarini et al., 2010). Both bipolar I and II are typically recurrent disorders, with people experiencing single episodes extremely rarely (Kessler et al., 2007). In about two- thirds of cases, the manic episodes either immediately precede or immediately follow a depressive episode; in other cases, the manic and depressive episodes are separated by intervals of rela- tively normal functioning. Figure 7.6 illustrates the different patterns of manic, hypomanic, and depressive symptoms and episodes that can be seen in bipolar-spectrum disorders.  M D m d Normal mood variation Cyclothymic personality Cyclothymic disorder Bipolar II   "Unipolar mania" Bipolar I  The Manic-Depressive Spectrum  figure   7.6  The Manic-Depressive Spectrum.   There is a spectrum of bipolarity in moods. All of us have our ups and downs, which are indicated here as normal mood variation. People with a cyclothymic personality have more marked and regular mood swings, and people with cyclothymic disorder go through periods when they meet the criteria for dysthymia (except for the 2-year duration) and other periods when they meet the criteria for hypomania. People with bipolar II disorder have periods of major depression and periods of hypomania. Unipolar mania is an extremely rare condition. Finally, people with bipolar I disorder have periods of major depression and periods of mania. (Adapted from Goodwin & Jamison, 2009.)  Source: From Frederick K. Goodwin and Kay R. Jamison. (2009).   Manic Depressive Illness . Copyright © 1990. Oxford University Press, Inc. Used by permission of Oxford University Press, Inc.
Most patients with bipolar disorder experience periods of remis- sion during which they are relatively symptom-free, although this may occur on only about 50 percent of days (Kupka et al., 2007). Moreover, as many as 20 to 30 percent continue to experience significant impairment (occupational and/or inter- personal) and mood lability most of the time, and as many as 60 percent have chronic occupational or interpersonal problems between episodes. As with unipolar major depression, the recur- rences can be seasonal in nature, in which case   bipolar disorder with a seasonal pattern   is diagnosed.  FEATurES OF BiPOLAr DiSOrDEr   The duration of manic and hypomanic episodes tends to be shorter than the duration of depressive episodes, with typically about three times as many days spent depressed as manic or hypomanic (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). There has been controversy over whether the symptoms of the depressive episodes of bipolar disorder are clinically distin- guishable from those seen in unipolar major depressive episodes (Cuellar et al., 2005; Perris, 1992). Although there is a high degree of overlap in symptoms, there are some significant differ- ences. The most widely replicated differences are that, relative to people with a unipolar depressive episode, people with a bipolar depressive episode tend, on average, to show more mood labili- lty, more psychotic features, more psychomotor retardation, and more substance abuse (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). By contrast, individuals with unipolar depression, on average, show more anxiety, agitation, insomnia, physical complaints, and weight loss (see also Johnson et al., 2009). In spite of the high degree of similarity in symptoms, research clearly indicates that major depressive episodes in people with bipolar disorder are, on aver- age, more severe than those seen in unipolar disorder, and, not surprisingly, they also cause more role impairment (Kessler et al., 2007).   Watch   the   Video   Feliziano: Living with Bipolar Disorder  on   MyPsychLab . A person who is depressed cannot be diagnosed with bipolar I disorder unless he or she has exhibited at least one manic or mixed episode in the past. Many people with bipolar disorder whose initial episode or episodes are depressive (about 50 percent) are misdiagnosed at first and possibly throughout their lives (for instance, if no manic episodes are observed or reported, or if they die before a manic episode is experienced). Averaging across many studies, one important review estimates that somewhere between 10 and 50 percent of people who have an initial major depres- sive episode will later have a manic or hypomanic episode and will be diagnosed at that time as having bipolar I or II disorder (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). Moreover, the younger the person is at the time of the first diagnosis, and the greater the number of recurrent episodes, the more likely he or she is to be diag- nosed with bipolar I or II disorder. One study shows that people presenting initially with a major depressive disorder who have a history of creative achievements, professional instability, multiple marriages, and flamboyant behavior may be especially likely to be diagnosed later with bipolar II disorder (Akiskal, 2005). Misdiagnoses are unfortunate because there are somewhat different treatments of choice for unipolar and bipolar depres- sion. Moreover, there is evidence that some antidepressant drugs used to treat what is thought to be unipolar depression may actually precipitate manic episodes in patients who actually have as-yet-undetected bipolar disorder, thus worsening the course of the illness (Ghaemi et al., 2003; Whybrow, 1997). On average, people with bipolar disorder suffer from more epi- sodes during their lifetimes than do persons with unipolar disorder (although these episodes tend to be somewhat shorter, averaging 3 to 4 months; Angst & Sellaro, 2000; Solomon et al., 2010). As many as 5 to 10 percent of persons with bipolar disorder experience at least four episodes (either manic or depressive) every year, a pat- tern known as   rapid cycling . In fact, those who go through periods of rapid cycling usually experience many more than four episodes a year. Our case example of Ernest Eaton (“Roller Coaster”) was diagnosed with bipolar I disorder with rapid cycling. People who develop rapid cycling are slightly more likely to be women, to have a history of more episodes (especially more manic or hypomanic epi- sodes), to have an earlier average age of onset, and to make more sui- cide attempts (Coryell et al., 2003; Kupka et al., 2005; Nierenberg et al., 2010). Rapid cycling is sometimes precipitated by taking cer- tain kinds of antidepressants (Goodman & Jamison, 2007; Kilzieh & Akiskal, 1999). Fortunately, for about 50 percent of cases, rapid cycling is a temporary phenomenon and gradually disappears within about 2 years (Coryell et al., 1995; Coryell et al., 2003). Overall, the probabilities of “full recovery” from bipolar disorder are discouraging even with the widespread use of mood- stabilizing medications such as lithium, with one review estimating that patients with bipolar disorder spend about 20 percent of their  Many highly creative people are believed to have had bipolar disorder, going through periods of intense creative productivity during manic phases, and often going through unproductive periods when clinically depressed. One such individual was the British novelist Virginia Woolf (1882–1941). Woolf committed suicide by drowning herself.
lives in episodes (Angst & Sellaro, 2000). One 20-year prospec- tive study in which over 200 patients were followed for an average of 17 years found that 24 percent had relapsed within 6 months of recovery; 77 percent had had at least one new episode within 4 years of recovery; and 82 percent had relapsed within 7 years (Coryell et al., 1995). Another prospective study of 146 bipolar patients found that they experienced some symptoms (mostly sub- syndromal) on an average of 47 percent of the weeks during the 13-year follow-up period. During the follow-up period, depressive symptoms were three times more common than manic or hypo- manic symptoms (Judd et al., 2002; see also Judd, Schettler et al., 2003). The long-term course of bipolar disorder is even more severe for patients who have comorbid substance-abuse or depen- dence disorders (which is even more common than with unipolar disorders; e.g., Levin & Hennessey, 2004; Swann, 2010).  in review  •   Describe the symptoms and clinical features of cyclothymia and bipolar disorder.  •   Describe the typical course of bipolar I and bipolar II disorders.  Causal Factors in Bipolar Disorders  As for unipolar disorders, a host of causal factors for bipolar disorder have been posited over the past century. However, bio- logical causal factors are clearly dominant, and the role of psy- chological causal factors has received significantly less attention. The majority of research has focused on bipolar I disorder, which is what we focus on here.  Biological Causal Factors  A number of biological factors are thought to play a causal role in the onset of bipolar disorder. These factors include genetic, neurochemical, hormonal, neurophysiological, neuroanatomical, and biological rhythm influences.  GENETiC iNFLuENCES   There is a greater genetic contribution to bipolar I disorder than to unipolar disorder. A summary of studies using refined diagnostic procedures suggests that about 8 to 10 percent of the first-degree relatives of a person with bipolar I illness can be expected to have bipolar disorder, relative to 1 percent in the general population (Katz & McGuffin, 1993; Plo- min et al., 2008; Willcutt & McQueen, 2010). The first-degree relatives of a person with bipolar disorder are also at elevated risk for unipolar major depression (especially atypical depression), al- though the reverse is not true (Akiskal & Benazzi, 2005; Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). Although family studies cannot by themselves establish a genetic basis for the disorder, results from twin studies dating back to the 1950s also point to a genetic basis because the concordance rates for these disorders are much higher for identical than for fraternal twins. For example, one review found that the average concordance rate was about 60 percent for monozygotic twins and about 12 percent for dizygotic twins (Kelsoe, 1997). The best study to date (McGuffin et al., 2003) found that 67 percent of monozygotic twins with bipolar disorder had a co-twin who shared the diagnosis of bipolar or unipolar disorder (60 percent of these concordant co-twins had bipolar disorder, and 40 percent had unipolar disorder). The concordance rate in dizygotic twins was 19 percent. This and other studies suggest that genes account for about 80 to 90 percent of the variance in the liability to develop bipolar I disorder (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; McGuffin et al., 2003). This is higher than heritability estimates for unipo- lar disorder or any of the other major adult psychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia (Torrey et al., 1994). Moreover, genetic influences are even stronger in early- as opposed to late-onset bipo- lar disorder (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). The finding of elevated rates of both bipolar and unipolar forms of the disorder in the relatives of people with bipolar disorder may be explained in several ways. One possibility is that bipolar disorder may be a more severe form of the same underlying disor- der as unipolar disorder. If this were the case, then the increased rate of unipolar disorder in relatives of patients with bipolar disor- der would occur because bipolar is the more severe disorder—and not all relatives have as severe a form of the disorder as the identi- fied patient (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Plomin et al., 2008). At least one strong study, however, found no support for this hypoth- esis (McGuffin et al., 2003). Instead, the results suggest that about 70 percent of the genetic liability for mania is distinct from the genetic liability for depression. In other words, these results suggest that people with bipolar disorder are genetically susceptible to both depression and to mania, and that these susceptibilities are largely independent. These very important findings need to be replicated before strong conclusions can be made. Efforts to locate the chromosomal site(s) of the implicated gene or genes in this genetic transmission of bipolar disorder suggest that it is polygenic (Willcutt & McQueen, 2010). Although a great deal of research has been directed at identifying candidate genes through linkage analysis and association studies, no consistent support yet exists for any specific mode of genetic transmission of bipolar disorder, according to several compre- hensive reviews (Potash & DePaulo, 2000; Tsuang et al., 2004).  NEurOChEMiCAL FACTOrS   The early monoamine hypoth- esis for unipolar disorder was extended to bipolar disorder, the hypothesis being that if depression is caused by deficiencies of norepinephrine or serotonin, then perhaps mania is caused by excesses of these neurotransmitters. There is good evidence for increased norepinephrine activity during manic episodes and less consistent evidence for lowered norepinephrine activity dur- ing depressive episodes (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Manji & Lenox, 2000). However, serotonin activity appears to be low in both depressive and manic phases. As noted earlier, norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine are all involved in regulating our mood states (Howland & Thase, 1999; Southwick et al., 2005). Evidence for the role of
dopamine stems in part from research showing that increased dopaminergic activity in several brain areas may be related to manic symptoms of hyperactivity, grandiosity, and euphoria (Cousins et al., 2009; Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). High doses of drugs such as cocaine and amphetamines, which are known to stimulate dopamine, also produce manic-like behavior (Cousins et al., 2009). Drugs like lithium reduce dopaminergic activity and are antimanic. In depression there appear to be decreases in both norepinephrine and dopamine functioning (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Manji & Lenox, 2000). Thus disturbances in the balance of these neurotransmitters seem to be one of the keys to understanding this debilitating illness.  ABNOrMALiTiES OF hOrMONAL rEGuLATOry SySTEMS  Some neurohormonal research on bipolar disorder has focused on the HPA axis. Cortisol levels are elevated in bipolar depres- sion (as they are in unipolar depression), but they are usually not elevated during manic episodes (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). Similarly, bipolar depressed patients show evidence of abnormalities on the dexamethasone suppression test (DST) described earlier at about the same rate as do unipolar depressed patients, and these abnormalities persist even when the patients have been fully remitted and asymptomatic for at least 4 weeks (e.g., Langan & McDonald, 2009; Watson, Gallagher et al., 2004). During a manic episode, however, their rate of DST abnormalities has generally (but not always) been found to be much lower (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Manji & Lenox, 2000, although see Langan & McDonald, 2009). Research has also focused on abnormalities of the hypothalamic-pituitary- thyroid axis because abnormalities of thyroid function are frequently accompanied by changes in mood. Many bipolar pa- tients have subtle but significant abnormalities in the function- ing of this axis, and administration of thyroid hormone often makes antidepressant drugs work better (Altshuler et al., 2001; Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). However, thyroid hormone can also precipitate manic episodes in patients with bipolar disorder (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007).  NEurOPhySiOLOGiC AND NEurOANATOMiC iNFLu- ENCES   With positron emission tomography (PET) scans, it is possible to visualize variations in brain glucose metabolic rates in depressed and manic states, although there is far less evidence re- garding manic states because of the great difficulties studying pa- tients who are actively manic. Several summaries of the evidence from studies using PET and other neuroimaging techniques show that, whereas blood flow to the left prefrontal cortex is re- duced during depression, during mania it is increased in certain other parts of the prefrontal cortex (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; see also Bermpohl et al., 2010). Thus there are shifting patterns of brain activity during mania and during depressed and normal moods. Other neurophysiological findings from patients with bipolar disorder have shown both similarities to and differences from patients with unipolar disorder and normal controls. For example, several recent reviews suggest that there are deficits in activity in the prefrontal cortex in bipolar disorder. These seem related to neuropsychological deficits that people with bipolar disorder show in problem solving, planning, working memory, shifting of attention, and sustained attention on cognitive tasks (e.g., Chen et al., 2011; Haldane & Frangou, 2004; Malhi, Ivanovski, et al, 2004). This is similar to what is seen in uni- polar depression, as are deficits in the anterior cingulate cortex (Langan & McDonald, 2009). However, structural imaging studies suggest that certain subcortical structures, including the basal ganglia and amygdala, are enlarged in bipolar disorder but reduced in size in unipolar depression. The decreases in hippo- campal volume that are often observed in unipolar depression are generally not found in bipolar depression (Konarski et al., 2008). Some studies using fMRI also find increased activation in bipolar patients in subcortical brain regions involved in emotional pro- cessing, such as the thalamus and amygdala, relative to unipolar patients and normals (Chen et al., 2011; Malhi, Lagopoulos et al., 2004; Nusslock et al., 2012). Overall, it is hard to draw firm conclusions in this area yet because there are so many inconsis- tencies in results across studies. However, there is initial meta- analytic support for dysregulation in frontal-limbic activation in individuals with bipolar disorder compared to controls (Chen et al., 2011). Hopefully more definitive findings will follow when much-needed technological innovations unfold (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007).  SLEEP AND OThEr BiOLOGiCAL rhyThMS   There is con- siderable evidence regarding disturbances in biological rhythms such as circadian rhythms in bipolar disorder, even after symp- toms have mostly remitted (e.g., Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Harvey, 2008; Jones et al., 2005; Murray & Harvey, 2010). During manic episodes, patients with bipolar disorder tend to sleep very little (seemingly by choice, not because of insomnia), and this is the most common symptom to occur prior to the onset of a manic episode. During depressive episodes, they tend toward hypersomnia (too much sleep). Even between episodes people with bipolar disorder show substantial sleep difficulties, including high rates of insomnia (e.g., Harvey, 2008; Harvey et al., 2005; Millar et al., 2004). Bipolar disorder also sometimes shows a seasonal pattern in the same way unipolar disorder does, suggesting disturbances of seasonal biological rhythms, although these may be the result of circadian abnormalities in which the onset of the sleep–wake cycle is set ahead of the onset of other circadian rhythms. Given the cyclic nature of bipolar disorder itself, this focus on disturbances in biological rhythms holds promise for future integrative theories of the biological under- pinnings of bipolar disorder. This is particularly true because patients with bipolar disorder seem especially sensitive to, and easily disturbed by, any changes in their daily cycles that require a resetting of their biological clocks (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Jones et al., 2005; Murray & Harvey, 2010).
Psychological Causal Factors  Although biological factors play a prominent role in the onset of bipolar disorder, psychosocial factors have also been found to be involved in the etiology of the disorder. In particular, stressful life events, poor social support, and certain personality traits and cognitive styles have been identified as important psychological causal factors.  STrESSFuL LiFE EvENTS   Stressful life events appear to be as important in precipitating bipolar depressive episodes as they are in triggering unipolar depressive episodes. There is also some evidence that stressful life events are sometimes involved in pre- cipitating manic episodes as well (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). The stressful life events are thought to influence the timing of an episode, perhaps by activating the underlying vulnerability. One study also found that patients who experienced severe negative events took an average of three times longer to recover from manic, depressive, or mixed episodes than those without a severe negative event (395 versus 112 days; Johnson & Miller, 1997). Even minor negative events were found to increase time to recovery. It has long been argued that as the illness unfolds, the manic and depressive episodes become more autonomous and do not usually seem to be precipitated by stressful events (e.g., Bender & Alloy, 2011; Post, 1992). Some of these conclusions may be pre- mature, however, given that most studies addressing this issue have relied on patients’ memories of events before episodes, which may be unreliable (Johnson & Roberts, 1995). In several good prospec- tive studies using more sophisticated stress measurement tech- niques, Ellicott and colleagues (1990; see also Hammen, 1995) did not find that stress played a less important role in precipitating episodes for people who had had more episodes (see also Alloy et al., 2010; Bender & Alloy, 2011; Hlastala et al., 2000). How might stressful life events operate to increase the chance of relapse? One hypothesized mechanism is through the desta- bilizing effects that stressful life events may have on critical bio- logical rhythms. Although evidence in support of this idea is still preliminary, it appears to be a promising hypothesis, especially for manic episodes (e.g., Bender & Alloy, 2011; Malkoff-Schwartz et al., 1998; see Grandin et al., 2006, for a review).  OThEr PSyChOLOGiCAL FACTOrS iN BiPOLAr DiSOrDEr  Other social environmental variables may also affect the course of bipolar disorder. For example, one study found that people with bipolar disorder who reported low social support showed more depressive recurrences over a 1-year follow-up, indepen- dent of the effects of stressful life events, which also predicted more recurrences (Cohen et al., 2004; see also Alloy et al., 2010). There is also some evidence that personality and cognitive variables may interact with stressful life events in determining the likelihood of relapse. For example, the personality variable neuroticism has been associated with symptoms of depression and mania (e.g., Quilty et al., 2009), and two studies have found that neuroticism predicts increases in depressive symptoms in people with bipolar disorder just as it does in unipolar disorder. Moreover, personality variables and cognitive styles that are re- lated to goal-striving, drive, and incentive motivation have been associated with bipolar disorder (e.g., Alloy et al., 2009). For example, two personality variables associated with high levels of achievement striving and increased sensitivity to rewards in the environment predicted increases in manic symptoms—especially during periods of active goal striving or goal attainment (such as studying for an important exam and then doing very well in it; Lozano & Johnson, 2001; Meyer et al., 2001; see also Alloy et al., 2010). Another study found that students with a pessimistic attributional style who also had negative life events showed an increase in depressive symptoms whether they had bipolar or un- ipolar disorder. Interestingly, however, the bipolar students who had a pessimistic attributional style and experienced negative life events also showed increases in manic symptoms at other points in time (Alloy et al., 2010; Reilly-Harrington et al., 1999).  in review  •   Summarize the major biological causal factors for bipolar disor- der, including genetic, biochemical, and other biological factors.  •   What role do psychological factors, including stressful life events, seem to play in bipolar disorder?  Sociocultural Factors Affecting Unipolar and Bipolar Disorders  Research on the association of sociocultural factors with both unipolar and bipolar mood disorders is discussed together because much of the research conducted in this area has not made clear-cut diagnostic distinctions between the two types of disorders. Although the prevalence of mood disorders seems to vary considerably among different societies, it has been dif- ficult to provide conclusive evidence for this because of various methodological problems, including widely differing diag- nostic practices in different cultures, and because the symp- toms of depression appear to vary considerably across cultures (Chentsova-Dutton & Tsai, 2009; Kaelber et al., 1995; Kleinman, 2004).  Cross-Cultural Differences in Depressive Symptoms  Depression occurs in all cultures that have been studied. How- ever, the form that it takes differs widely, as does its prevalence (e.g., Chentsova-Dutton & Tsai, 2009; Marsella, 1980). For example, in some non-Western cultures such as China and Japan where rates of depression are relatively low, many of the psychological symptoms of depression are often not present. Instead people tend to exhibit so-called somatic and vegeta- tive manifestations such as sleep disturbance, loss of appetite,
weight loss, and loss of sexual interest (Kleinman, 2004; Ryder et al., 2008; Tsai & Chentsova-Dutton, 2002). The psychologi- cal components of depression that often seem to be missing (from a Western standpoint) are the feelings of guilt, suicidal ideation, worthlessness, and self-recrimination, which are so commonly seen in the “developed” countries (Kidson & Jones, 1968; Tsai & Chentsova-Dutton, 2002). Even when these “psychological” symptoms are present, in many cases the affected individuals may think that physical symptoms have more legitimacy and that it is more appropriate to reveal and discuss physical rather than psychological symptoms (Chentsova-Dutton & Tsai, 2009). Several possible reasons for these symptom differences stem from Asian beliefs in the unity of the mind and body, a lack of expressiveness about emotions more generally, and the stigma attached to mental illness in these cultures (e.g., Chentsova-Dutton & Tsai, 2009). Another reason why guilt and negative thoughts about the self may be common in Western but not in Asian cultures is that Western cultures view the individual as independent and autonomous, so when failures occur, internal attributions are made. By contrast, in many Asian cultures individuals are viewed as inherently interdependent with others. Nevertheless, as countries like China have incorporated some Western values over the course of becoming increasingly industrialized and urbanized, rates of depression have risen a good deal relative to several decades ago (e.g., Dennis, 2004; Hong et al., 2010; Zhou et al., 2000). Indeed, one study of adolescents from Hong Kong and the United States found levels of depressive symptoms and hopelessness to be higher in the adolescents from Hong Kong (Stewart, Kennard et al., 2004).  Cross-Cultural Differences in Prevalence  There is some similarity in the lifetime prevalence rates for bipo- lar spectrum disorders across many different countries ranging from India and Japan to the United States, Lebanon, and New Zealand (0.1 to 4.4 percent; Merikangas et al., 2011). Further- more, there is remarkable similarity in the patterns of comor- bidity across countries, with anxiety disorders being the most common conditions that are comorbid with bipolar disorder as shown in Figure 7.7 (Merikangas et al., 2011). Prevalence rates for depression (whether expressed primarily through somatic or psychological symptoms) vary a great deal across countries, as revealed by many epidemiological studies. For example, in Taiwan the lifetime prevalence has been estimated at 1.5 percent, whereas in the United States and Lebanon it has been estimated at 17 to 19 percent (Tsai & Chentsova-Dutton, 2002). Recurrent suicide  In some cultures the concept of depression as we know it simply does not exist. For example, Australian aborigines who are “depressed” show none of the guilt and self-abnegation commonly seen in more devel- oped countries. They also do not show suicidal tendencies but instead are more likely to vent their hostilities onto others rather than onto themselves.  Prevalence (%)  25 20 15 10 5 0  Taiwan Korea Puerto Rico USA-ECA Iceland Germany Canada New Zealand Italy USA-NCS Hungary Switzerland France Lebanon  Nation  figure   7.7  Prevalence rates for Depression Across Several Nations.   USA-NCS, United States according to the National Comorbidity Study; USA-ECA, United States according to the Epidemiological Catchment Area Study.  Source:   Tsai, J. L., and Chentsova-Dutton, Y. (2002). “Understanding depression across cultures.” In I. H. Gotlib and C. L. Hammen (Eds.)   Handbook of depression   (p. 471). Copyright © 2002. The Guilford Press. Reprinted with permission.
attempts are also higher in Western cultures than in Eastern cul- tures (Chentsova-Dutton & Tsai, 2009). The reasons for such wide variation are undoubtedly very complex, and much work remains to be done before we fully understand them. The ideas that are being explored include different levels of important psy- chosocial risk variables in different cultures and different levels of stress. For example, there appear to be cross-cultural differences in hypothesized risk variables such as pessimistic attributional style, although how these differences might translate into different rates of depression is unclear because we do not yet know whether the same risk variables are operative in different cultures. However, research is beginning to explore whether psychosocial risk fac- tors for mood disorders operate across cultures, and there is some initial evidence that factors like rumination, hopelessness, and pessimistic attributional style (Abela et al., 2011) are associated with risk for depression in other countries, such as China (Hong et al., 2010).  Demographic Differences in the united States  In our own society, the role of sociocultural factors in mood disorders is also evident. The three large epidemiological studies conducted in the United States since the early 1980s did not find any large racial or ethnic differences. However, the most recent National Comorbidity Survey-Replication (Kessler, Chiu et al., 2005) found that the prevalence rates among African Americans were slightly lower than among European white Americans and Hispanics, which were comparable. Consistent with this result, the National Survey of American Life found that the lifetime prevalence of major depression was higher in European white Americans than in African Americans (Williams et al., 2007). However, 12-month prevalence estimates were similar across these two groups, and there was evidence that African Americans might exhibit a more chronic course of depression than Euro- pean white Americans. Furthermore, Native Americans, by contrast, have significantly elevated rates compared to white Americans (e.g., Hasin et al., 2005). There are no significant dif- ferences among such groups for bipolar disorder. Other epidemiological research indicates that rates of unipo- lar depression are inversely related to socioeconomic status; that is, higher rates occur in lower socioeconomic groups (e.g., Kessler, Chiu et al., 2005; Monroe et al., 2009). This may well be because low SES leads to adversity and life stress (Dohrenwend, 2000; Monroe & Hadjiyannakis, 2002). However, in spite of earlier indications that rates of bipolar disorder are   elevated   among those in higher socioeconomic groups, current evidence from carefully controlled studies has not found bipolar disorder to be related to socioeconomic class (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). Another group that has elevated rates of mood disorders consists of individuals who have high levels of accomplish- ments in the arts (see Figure 7.8). Indeed, a good deal of evi- dence has shown that both unipolar and bipolar disorder, but especially bipolar disorder, occur with alarming frequency in poets, writers, composers, and artists (Jamison, 1993; Murray & Johnson, 2010). Jamison has also documented for a number of such famous creative individuals how their periods of pro- ductivity covary with the manic, or hypomanic, and depressive phases of their illnesses. One possible hypothesis to explain this relationship is that mania or hypomania actually facilitates the creative process, and/or that the intense negative emotional experiences of depression provide material for creative activ- ity. A study of the eminent nineteenth-century American poet Emily Dickinson provides support for the latter part of this hypothesis—that is, evidence supports the idea that Dickin- son’s painful experiences with panic disorder and depression provided ideas for her especially high-quality work during those times. However, a detailed analysis of her hypomanic periods suggests that her hypomanic symptoms increased her motivation and output but not her creativity per se (Ramey & Weisberg, 2004).  in review  •   What kinds of cross-cultural differences are there in depressive symptoms, and what kinds of cross-cultural factors influence the prevalence of unipolar depression?  •   What are some of the basic demographic differences in the United States influencing rates of unipolar and bipolar disorders?  Treatments and Outcomes  Many patients who suffer from mood disorders (especially unipolar disorders) never seek treatment. Even without formal treatment, the great majority of individuals with mania and depression will recover (often only temporarily) within less than a year. However, given the enormous amount of personal suffering and lost productivity that these individuals endure, and given the wide variety of treatments that are available today, more and more people who experience these disorders are seeking treatment. There was a rapid increase in the treat- ment of depression from 1987 to 1997, and there has been a more modest increase since 1998 (Marcus & Olfson, 2010). Interestingly, between 1998 and 2007, there was a decline in the reported use of psychotherapy, although the use of antide- pressant medication remained relatively stable. These changes are happening in an era in which there is greatly increased pub- lic awareness of the availability of effective treatments and dur- ing a time in which significantly less stigma is associated with experiencing a mood disorder. Nevertheless, results from the National Comorbidity Survey-Replication showed that only about 40 percent of people with mood disorders receive mini- mally adequate treatment, with the other 60 percent receiving no treatment or inadequate care (Wang, Lane et al., 2005). Fortunately, the probability of receiving treatment is somewhat higher for people with severe unipolar depression and with bipolar disorder than for those with less severe depression (Kessler et al., 2007).
Pharmacotherapy  Antidepressant, mood-stabilizing, and antipsychotic drugs are all used in the treatment of unipolar and bipolar disorders (see  6 for further information about these medications). The first category of antidepressant medications was developed in the 1950s; these medications are known as   monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)   because they inhibit the action of monoamine oxidase—the enzyme responsible for the breakdown of norepinephrine and serotonin once released. The MAOIs can be as effective in treating depression as other categories of medi- cations discussed next, but they can have potentially dangerous, even sometimes fatal, side effects if certain foods rich in the amino acid tyramine (e.g., red wine, beer, aged cheese, salami) are consumed. Thus they are not used very often today unless other classes of medication have failed. Depression with atypical features is the one subtype of depression that seems to respond preferentially to the MAOIs. For most moderately to seriously depressed patients, includ- ing those with dysthymia (Klein, 2008; Kocsis et al., 1997), the drug treatment of choice since the early 1960s until about 1990 was one of the standard antidepressants (called   tricyclic antidepressants   because of their chemical structure) such as imipramine. These are known to increase neurotransmission of the monoamines (primarily norepinephrine and to a lesser extent serotonin; Hollon, Thase, & Markowitz, 2002; Thase & Denko, 2008). The efficacy of the tricyclics in significantly reducing depressive symptoms has been demonstrated in hun- dreds of studies where the response of depressed patients given these drugs has been compared with the response of patients given a placebo. However, only about 50 percent show what is considered clinically significant improvement, and many of these patients still have significant residual depressive symptoms. Fortunately, about 50 percent of those who do not respond to an initial trial of medication will show a clinically significant response when switched to a different antidepressant or to a combination of medications (Hollon, et al., 2002). Unfortunately, the tricyclics have unpleasant side effects for some people (dry mouth, constipation, sexual dysfunction, and weight gain may occur), and many patients do not continue long enough with the drug for it to have its antidepressant effects even though side effects frequently do diminish to some degree with time. In addition, because these drugs are highly toxic when  Expected rate in general population Writers (Andreasen,  1987 ) Writers & Artists (Jamison,   1989 ) a,b  Artists (Schidlkraut & Hirshfeld,   1990 ) c  Writers & Artists (Akiskal & Akiskal, unpublished) Poets (British,  1705–1805 ) (Jamison)  Percentage  0   10   20   30   40   50   60   70   80  a Treatment rate (estimated to be one-third of the rate of illness). b Bipolar II and cyclothymia rates not ascertained. c Bipolar I, bipolar II, and cyclothymia rates not ascertained.  Major depressive illness Cyclothymia/Bipolar II Manic-depressive illness (Bipolar I)  figure   7.8  rates of Mood Disorders in Writers and Artists.   Although it is difficult to determine a reliable diagnosis of influential writers, po- ets, and artists (many of whom are long ago deceased), a number of psychological his- torians have compiled figures such as these, which clearly indicate that such individuals are far more likely than the general popula- tion to have had a unipolar or bipolar mood disorder. (Adapted from Jamison, K. R., 1993.  Touched with Fire . Free Press.)
taken in large doses, there is some risk in prescribing them for suicidal patients, who might use them for an overdose. Primarily because of the side effects and toxicity of tricyclics, physicians have increasingly chosen to prescribe one of the anti- depressants from the   selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)   category (Olfson & Marcus, 2009). These SSRI medica- tions are generally no more effective than the tricyclics; indeed some findings suggest that the tricyclics are more effective than SSRIs for severe depression. However, the SSRIs tend to have many fewer side effects and are better tolerated by patients, as well as being less toxic in large doses. The primary negative side effects of the SSRIs are problems with orgasm and lowered interest in sexual activity, although insomnia, increased physical agitation, and gastrointestinal distress also occur in some patients (Thase, 2008). SSRIs are used not only to treat significant depression but also to treat people with mild depressive symptoms (Gitlin, 2002). Many mental health professionals believe that prescrip- tions for SSRIs are being written for these milder cases at an excessive rate. Prescribing drugs to essentially healthy people merely because the drugs make them feel more energetic, outgo- ing, and productive raises many ethical questions. Furthermore, it is even more troubling that some recent quantitative research suggests that antidepressant medication is superior to placebo only for patients with very severe depressive symptoms, with negligible treatment effects observed for those with less severe symptoms (Fournier et al., 2010). In the past decade, several new atypical antidepressants (nei- ther tricyclics nor SSRIs) have also become increasingly popular, and each has its own advantages (Marcus & Olfson, 2010). For example, bupropion (Wellbutrin) does not have as many side effects (especially sexual side effects) as the SSRIs and, because of its activating effects, is particularly good for depressions with sig- nificant weight gain, loss of energy, and oversleeping. In addition, venlafaxine (Effexor) seems superior to the SSRIs in the treatment of severe or chronic depression, although the profile of side effects is similar to that for the SSRIs. Several other atypical antidepres- sants have also been shown to be effective (see  6).  ThE COurSE OF TrEATMENT WiTh ANTiDEPrESSANT DruGS   Antidepressant drugs usually require at least 3 to 5 weeks to take effect. Generally, if there are no signs of improve- ment after about 6 weeks, physicians should try a new medica- tion because about 50 percent of those who do not respond to the first drug prescribed do respond to a second one. Also, dis- continuing the drugs when symptoms have remitted may result in relapse. Recall that the natural course of an untreated depres- sive episode is typically 6 to 9 months. Thus, when depressed patients take drugs for 3 to 4 months and then stop because they are feeling better, they are likely to relapse because the underly- ing depressive episode is actually still present, and only its symp- tomatic expression has been suppressed (Gitlin, 2002; Hollon et al., 2002; Hollon et al., 2006). Because depression is often a recurrent disorder, physicians have increasingly recommended that patients continue for very long periods of time on the drugs (ideally at the same dose) in order to prevent recurrence (Nutt, 2010). Thus, these medications can often be effective in pre- vention, as well as treatment, for patients subject to recurrent episodes (Gitlin, 2009; Hollon et al., 2006; Thase & Denko, 2008). Nevertheless, one study found that 25 percent of patients continuing to receive medication during the maintenance phase of treatment showed recurrence of major depression even while on the drugs (e.g., Solomon et al., 2005). Other studies have indicated that patients showing even a few residual symptoms are most likely to relapse, indicating the importance of trying to treat the patient to full remission of symptoms (e.g., Keller, 2004; Thase & Denko, 2008).  LiThiuM AND OThEr MOOD-STABiLiziNG DruGS   Lithium therapy has now become widely used as a mood stabilizer in the treatment of both depressive and manic episodes of bipo- lar disorder. The term   mood stabilizer   is often used to describe lithium and related drugs because they have both antimanic and antidepressant effects—that is, they exert mood-stabilizing ef- fects in either direction.   Lithium   has been more widely studied as a treatment of manic episodes than of depressive episodes, and estimates are that about three-quarters of manic patients show at least partial improvement. In the treatment of bipolar depression, lithium may be no more effective than traditional antidepressants (study results are inconsistent), but about three- quarters show at least partial improvement (Keck & McElroy, 2007). However, treatment with antidepressants is associated with significant risk of precipitating manic episodes or rapid cycling, although the risk of this happening is reduced if the person also takes lithium (e.g., Keck & McElroy, 2007; Thase & Denko, 2008). Lithium is also often effective in preventing cycling between manic and depressive episodes (although not necessarily for patients with rapid cycling), and bipolar patients are frequently maintained on lithium therapy over long time periods, even when not manic or depressed, simply to prevent new episodes. Although early studies indicated that lithium was quite effective in preventing repeated bipolar attacks, more recently several large studies have found that only slightly more than one-third of patients maintained on lithium remained free of an episode over a 5-year follow-up period. Nevertheless, maintenance on lithium does clearly lead to having fewer episodes than are experienced by patients who discontinue their medication. In a quantitative study of patients discontinuing medication, the risk of having a new episode was 28 times higher per month when not on medi- cation than when on medication (Keck & McElroy, 2007). Lithium therapy can have some unpleasant side effects such as lethargy, cognitive slowing, weight gain, decreased motor coordination, and gastrointestinal difficulties. Long-term use of lithium is occasionally associated with kidney malfunction and sometimes permanent kidney damage, although end stage renal
disease seems to be a very rare consequence of long-term lithium treatment (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Tredget et al., 2010). Not surprisingly, these side effects, combined with the fact that many bipolar patients seem to miss the highs and the abundance of energy associated with their hypomanic and manic episodes, sometimes create problems with compliance in taking the drug. In the past several decades, evidence has emerged for the usefulness of another category of drugs known as the   anticonvul- sants   (such as carbamazepine, divalproex, and valproate) in the treatment of bipolar disorder (Keck & McElroy, 2007). These drugs are often effective in patients who do not respond well to lithium or who develop unacceptable side effects from it (Thase & Denko, 2008), and they may also be given in combination with lithium (Post et al., 2010). However, a number of studies have indicated that risk for attempted and completed suicide was nearly two to three times higher for patients on anticon- vulsant medications than for those on lithium (Goodwin et al., 2003; Thase & Denko, 2008), suggesting one major advantage of giving lithium to patients who can tolerate its side effects. Both bipolar and unipolar patients who show signs of psychosis (hallucinations and delusions) may also receive treatments with  antipsychotic medications   (see Chapters 13 and 16) in conjunc- tion with their antidepressant or mood-stabilizing drugs (Gitlin, 2009; Keck & McElroy, 2002; Rothschild et al., 2004).  Alternative Biological Treatments  In addition to the use of pharmacotherapy, there are several other biologically oriented approaches to the treatment of mood disor- ders. These approaches have been the subject of empirical study in recent years, and they appear to be promising treatment options.  ELECTrOCONvuLSivE ThErAPy   Because antidepressants often take 3 to 4 weeks to produce significant improvement,  electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)   is often used with severely depressed patients (especially among the elderly) who may pres- ent an immediate and serious suicidal risk, including those with psychotic or melancholic features (Gitlin, 2009; Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). It is also used in patients who cannot take anti- depressant medications or who are otherwise resistant to medica- tions (e.g., Heijnen et al., 2010; Mathew et al., 2005). When selection criteria for this form of treatment are carefully observed, a complete remission of symptoms occurs for many patients after about 6 to 12 treatments (with treatments administered about every other day). This means that a majority of severely depressed patients can be vastly better in 2 to 4 weeks (Gitlin, 2009; Mathew et al., 2005). The treatments, which induce seizures, are delivered under general anesthesia and with muscle relaxants. The most common immediate side effect is confusion, although there is some evidence for lasting adverse effects on cognition, such as amnesia and slowed response time (Sackeim et al., 2007). Maintenance dosages of an antidepressant and a mood-stabilizing drug such as lithium are then ordinarily used to maintain the treatment gains achieved until the depression has run its course (Mathew et al., 2005; Sackeim et al., 2009). ECT is also very use- ful in the treatment of manic episodes; reviews of the evidence suggest that it is associated with remission or marked improve- ment in 80 percent of manic patients (Gitlin, 1996; Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). Maintenance on mood-stabilizing drugs follow- ing ECT is usually required to prevent relapse.  TrANSCrANiAL MAGNETiC STiMuLATiON (TMS)   Although transcranial magnetic stimulation has been available as an alter- native biological treatment for some time now, only in the past decade has it begun to receive significant attention. TMS is a noninvasive technique allowing focal stimulation of the brain in patients who are awake. Brief but intense pulsating magnetic fields that induce electrical activity in certain parts of the cortex are delivered (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Janicak et al., 2005). The procedure is painless, and thousands of stimulations are delivered in each treatment session. Treatment usually occurs 5 days a week for 2 to 6 weeks. Although not all studies have found TMS to be effective in treating depression (see Couturier, 2005, for one review), many studies have shown it to be quite effective—indeed in some studies quite comparable to unilateral ECT and antidepressant medications (George & Post, 2011; Janicak et al., 2005; Schulze-Rauschenbach et al., 2005). In particular, research suggests that TMS is a promising approach for the treatment of unipolar depression in patients who are moderately resistant to other treatments (George & Post, 2011). Moreover, TMS has advantages over ECT in that cognitive per- formance and memory are not affected adversely and sometimes even improve, as opposed to ECT, where memory-recall deficits are common (Schulze-Rauschenbach et al., 2005).  DEEP BrAiN STiMuLATiON   In recent years, deep brain stimula- tion has been explored as a treatment approach for individuals with refractory depression who have not responded to other treatment approaches, such as medication, psychotherapy, and ECT. Deep brain stimulation involves implanting an electrode in the brain and then stimulating that area with electric current (Mayberg et al., 2005). Although more research on deep brain stimulation is needed, initial results suggest that it may have potential for treat- ment of unrelenting depression (see  6 for more details).  BriGhT LiGhT ThErAPy   In the past decade an alternative nonpharmacological biological method has received increasing attention— bright light therapy   (see Pail et al., 2011, for a review). This was originally used in the treatment of seasonal affective disorder, but it has now been shown to be effective in nonsea- sonal depressions as well (see Golden et al., 2005, for a quantita- tive review; see also Lieverse et al., 2011).  Psychotherapy  There are several forms of specialized psychotherapy, developed since the 1970s, that have proved effective in the treatment of unipolar depression, and the magnitude of improvement of the
best of these is approximately equivalent to that observed with medications. Considerable evidence also suggests that these same specialized forms of psychotherapy for depression, alone or in combination with drugs, significantly decrease the likelihood of relapse within a 2-year follow-up period (Hollon et al., 2005; Hollon & Dimidjian, 2009). Other specialized treatments have been developed to address the problems of people (and their families) with bipolar disorder.  COGNiTivE-BEhAviOrAL ThErAPy   One of the two best- known psychotherapies for unipolar depression with docu- mented effectiveness is   cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)   (also known as   cognitive therapy ), originally developed by Beck and colleagues (Beck et al., 1979; Clark, Beck, & Alford, 1999). It is a relatively brief form of treatment (usually 10 to 20 sessions) that focuses on here-and-now problems rather than on the more remote causal issues that psychodynamic psychotherapy often addresses. For example, cognitive therapy consists of highly structured, systematic attempts to teach people with unipolar depression to evaluate systematically their dysfunctional beliefs and negative automatic thoughts. They are also taught to iden- tify and correct their biases or distortions in information process- ing and to uncover and challenge their underlying depressogenic assumptions and beliefs. Cognitive therapy relies heavily on an empirical approach in that patients are taught to treat their beliefs as hypotheses that can be tested through the use of behav- ioral experiments. One example of challenging a negative automatic thought through a behavioral experiment can be seen in the following interchange between a cognitive therapist and a depressed patient.  Therapy Session: “My Husband Doesn’t Love Me Anymore”  patient :   My husband doesn’t love me any more.  therapist : That must be a very distressing thought. What makes you think that he doesn’t love you?  patient : Well, when he comes home in the evening, he never wants to talk to me. He just wants to sit and watch TV. Then he goes straight off to bed.  therapist : OK. Now, is there any evidence, anything he does, that goes against the idea that he doesn’t love you?  patient : I can’t think of any. Well, no, wait a minute. Actually it was my birthday a couple of weeks ago, and he gave me a watch which is really lovely. I’d seen them advertised and mentioned I liked it, and he took notice and went and got me one.  therapist : Right. Now how does that fit with the idea that he doesn’t love you?  patient : Well, I suppose it doesn’t really, does it? But then why is he like that in the evening?  therapist : I suppose him not loving you any more is one possible reason. Are there any other possible reasons?  patient : Well, he has been working very hard lately. I mean, he’s late home most nights, and he had to go in to the office at the weekend. So I suppose it could be that.  therapist : It could, couldn’t it? How could you find out if that’s it?  patient : Well, I could say I’ve noticed how tired he looks and ask him how he’s feeling and how the work’s going. I haven’t done that. I’ve just been getting annoyed because he doesn’t pay any attention to me.  therapist : That sounds like an excellent idea. How would you like to make that a homework task for this week? (From Fennell, M. J. V. (1989). Depression. In K. Hawton, P. M. Salkovskis, J. Kirk, & D. M. Clark (Eds.), Cognitive behaviour therapy for psychiatric problems: A practical guide. Oxford University Press.)  The usefulness of cognitive therapy has been amply documented in dozens of studies, including several studies on unipolar depressed inpatients and on patients diagnosed with depression with melancholic features (Craighead et al., 2007; Hollon, Haman, & Brown, 2002; Hollon et al., 2006). When compared with pharmacotherapy, it is at least as effec- tive when delivered by well-trained cognitive therapists. It also seems to have a special advantage in preventing relapse, similar to that obtained by staying on medication (Hollon & Ponniah, 2010; Hollon, 2011). Moreover, evidence is begin- ning to accumulate that it can prevent recurrence several years following the episode when the treatment occurred (Craighead et al., 2007; Hollon & Dimidjian, 2009). Perhaps not sur- prisingly, some recent interesting brain-imaging studies have shown that the biological changes in certain brain areas that occur following effective treatment with cognitive therapy versus medications are somewhat different, suggesting that the mechanisms through which they work are also different (e.g., Clark & Beck, 2010; Hollon & Dimidjian, 2009). One possibility is that medications may target the limbic system whereas cognitive therapy may have greater effects on cortical functions. Whether cognitive therapy is as effective as medication in the treatment of   severe   unipolar depression has been the more controversial question. However, recent evidence suggests that CBT and medications are equally effective in the treatment of severe depression (DeRubeis et al., 1999; Hollon et al., 2006). For example, one important two-site study of moderate to severe depression found that 58 percent responded to either cognitive therapy or medication (DeRubeis et al., 2005). However, by the end of the 2-year follow-up, when all cognitive therapy and medications had been discontinued for 1 year, only 25 percent of patients treated with cognitive therapy had had a relapse ver- sus 50 percent in the medication group (a highly significant dif- ference; Hollon et al., 2005; Hollon & Dimidjian, 2009). This is illustrated in Figure 7.9 on page 251.
Another variant on cognitive therapy, called   mindfulness- based cognitive therapy , has been developed in recent years to be used with people with highly recurrent depression (e.g., Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002, 2012; Teasdale, 2004). The logic of this treatment is based on findings that people with recurrent depression are likely to have negative thinking patterns activated when they are simply in a depressed mood. Perhaps rather than trying to alter the content of their negative thinking as in traditional cognitive therapy, it might be more useful to change the way in which these people relate to their thoughts, feelings, and bodily sensations. This group treatment involves training in mindfulness meditation techniques aimed at developing patients’ awareness of their unwanted thoughts, feelings, and sensations so that they no longer automatically try to avoid them but rather learn to accept them for what they are—simply thoughts occurring in the moment rather than a reflection of reality. A recent meta-analysis of findings from six randomized controlled trials of individuals in remission from depression suggests that mindfulness-based cognitive therapy is an effective treatment for reducing risk of relapse in those with a history of three or more prior depressive episodes who have been treated with antidepressant medication (Piet & Hou- gaard, 2011; Williams & Kuyken, 2012). Although the vast majority of research on CBT has focused on unipolar depression, recently there have been indications that a modified form of CBT may be quite useful, in combination with medication, in the treatment of bipolar disorder as well (Lam et al., 2003, 2005; Miklowitz, 2009). There is also pre- liminary evidence that mindfulness-based cognitive therapy may be useful in treating bipolar patients between episodes (Williams et al., 2008).  BEhAviOrAL ACTivATiON TrEATMENT   A relatively new and promising treatment for unipolar depression is called  behavioral activation treatment . This treatment approach focuses intensively on getting patients to become more active and engaged with their environment and with their inter- personal relationships. These techniques include scheduling daily activities and rating pleasure and mastery while engaging in them, exploring alternative behaviors to reach goals, and role-playing to address specific deficits. Traditional cogni- tive therapy attends to these same issues but to a lesser extent. Behavioral activation treatment, by contrast, does not focus on implementing cognitive changes directly but rather on changing behavior. The goals are to increase levels of posi- tive reinforcement and to reduce avoidance and withdrawal (Dimidjian et al., 2011). Early results were very promising, suggesting it may be as effective as more traditional cogni- tive therapies (Jacobson et al., 2001), and there is now meta- analytic support for this notion (Mazzucchelli et al., 2009). Indeed, one study found that moderately to severely depressed patients who received behavioral activation treatment did as well as those on medication and even slightly better than those who received cognitive therapy (Dimidjian et al., 2006). However, the slight superiority of behavioral activation treat- ment relative to cognitive therapy was not maintained, with some results indicating a trend for cognitive therapy to be slightly superior at follow-up (Dobson et al., 2008). Because it is easier to train therapists to administer behavioral activation treatment than cognitive therapy, it seems likely that there will be increased attention paid to this relatively new treatment in the coming years.  iNTErPErSONAL ThErAPy   The   interpersonal therapy (IPT)  approach has not yet been subjected to as extensive an evalua- tion as cognitive-behavioral therapy, nor is it as widely available. However, the studies that have been completed strongly support its effectiveness for treating unipolar depression (see Cuijpers et al., 2011, for a quantitative review; see also Hollon & Ponniah, 2010). Indeed, interpersonal therapy seems to be about as effective as medications or cognitive-behavioral treatment (Hollon et al., 2002; Weissman & Markowitz, 2002). This IPT approach focuses on current relationship issues, trying to help the person understand and change maladaptive interaction patterns (Bleiberg & Markowitz, 2008). Interpersonal therapy can also be useful in long-term follow-up for individuals with severe recurrent unipolar depression (Frank et al., 1990; Weissman & Markowitz,  Prior CT Group (n = 20) Prior ADM Group (n = 14)  16 14 12   20 18   22   24  Percentage of patients with no recurrence Time following the end of continuation (months)  0 120 100 80 60 40 20  figure   7.9  Survival curve illustrating how many months following the end of treat- ment it took patients from the two groups before they had another episode of depression (recurrence). One group had previously received cognitive therapy (CT) and the other group had received antidepressant medication (ADM).  Source: From Hollon, et al. (2005, April). Prevention of relapse following cognitive therapy vs. medications in moderate to severe depression. Arch. Gen. Psychiat., 62(4), 417–26. © 2005 American Medical Association. Reprinted with permission.
2002). Patients who received continued treatment with IPT once a month or who received continued medication were much less likely to have a recurrence than those maintained on a placebo over a 3-year follow-up period (although those maintained on medication were even less likely to relapse than those treated with monthly IPT). Furthermore, there is meta-analytic support for the notion that a combined maintenance treatment of IPT and medi- cation is associated with lower recurrence rates than maintenance medication treatment alone (Cuijpers et al., 2011). In addition, IPT has been adapted for treatment of bipolar disorder by adding a focus on stabilizing daily social rhythms that, if they become destabilized, may play a role in precipitating bipolar episodes. In this new treatment, called   interpersonal and social rhythm therapy , patients are taught to recognize the effect of interpersonal events on their social and circadian rhythms and to regularize these rhythms. As an adjunct to medication, this treatment seems promising (Miklowitz & Craighead, 2007; Miklowitz, 2009b).  FAMiLy AND MAriTAL ThErAPy   In any treatment program, it is important to deal with unusual stressors in a patient’s life because an unfavorable life situation may lead to a recurrence of the depression and may necessitate longer treatment. This point has been well established in studies indicating that relapse in unipolar and bipolar disorders, as in schizophrenia, is corre- lated with certain negative aspects of family life (Hooley, 2007; Hooley & Hiller, 2001). Behavior by a spouse that can be inter- preted by a former patient as criticism seems especially likely to produce depression relapse. For example, for bipolar disorder, some types of family interventions directed at reducing the level of expressed emotion or hostility, and at increasing the informa- tion available to the family about how to cope with the disor- der, have been found to be very useful in preventing relapse in these situations (e.g., Miklowitz, 2009; Miklowitz & Craighead, 2007). For married people who have unipolar depression and marital discord, marital therapy (focusing on the marital discord rather than on the depressed spouse alone) is as effective as cog- nitive therapy in reducing unipolar depression in the depressed spouse. Marital therapy has the further advantage of producing greater increases in marital satisfaction than cognitive therapy (Beach & Jones, 2002).  CONCLuSiONS   Even without formal therapy, the great major- ity of patients with mania and depression recover from a given episode in less than a year. With the modern methods of treat- ment discussed here, the general outlook for a given episode if treatment is obtained has become increasingly favorable for many, but by no means all, diagnosed individuals. However, at least half never receive even minimally adequate treatment. Although relapses and recurrences often occur, these can now often be prevented or at least reduced in frequency by mainte- nance therapy—through continuation of medication and follow- up therapy sessions at regular intervals. At the same time, the mortality rate for individuals with depression is significantly higher than that for the general popu- lation, partly because of the higher incidence of suicide but also because there is an excess of deaths due to natural causes (see Coryell & Winokur, 1992; Goodwin & Jamison, 2007), includ- ing coronary heart disease (e.g., Glassman, 2005; Whang et al., 2009; see Chapter 5). Patients with mania also have a high risk of death from accidents (often with alcohol as a contributing factor), neglect of proper health precautions, or physical exhaus- tion (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). Thus, the need for still-more- effective treatment methods, both immediate and long term, clearly remains. Also, a great need remains to study the factors that put people at risk for depressive disorders and to apply rel- evant findings to early intervention and prevention.  in review  •   Evaluate the effectiveness of antidepressant medications, mood- stabilizing drugs such as lithium, and electroconvulsive therapy in the treatment of unipolar and bipolar disorders.  •   Describe the three major forms of psychotherapy that have been shown to be effective for treating depression.  Suicide: The Clinical Picture and the Causal Pattern  The risk of   suicide —taking one’s own life—is a significant fac- tor in all types of depression. Although people also commit sui- cide for reasons other than depression, estimates are that about 50 to 90 percent of those who complete the act do so during a depressive episode or while in the recovery phase (Holma et al., 2010; van Praag, 2005). Paradoxically, the act often occurs at a point when the person appears to be emerging from the deep- est phase of the depressive episode. The risk of suicide is about 1 percent during the year in which a depressive episode occurs, but the lifetime risk for someone who has recurrent depressive episodes is about 15 percent (D. C. Clark, 1995; Stolberg et al., 2002). Moreover, even when suicide is not associated with depression, it is still generally associated with some other mental disorder; estimates are that approximately 90 percent of people who either attempted or successfully committed suicide had some psychiatric disorder at the time, although only about half of those had been diagnosed prior to the suicide (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Kessler, Berglund, Borges et al., 2005; Nock et al., 2010). Moreover, individuals with two or more mental disorders are at even greater risk than those with only one (Nock et al., 2008, 2010). Suicide now ranks among the 10 leading causes of death in most Western countries (Kessler et al., 2005). In the United States, it is the 10th leading cause of death, with current esti- mates of about 35,000 suicides each year (Kochanek et al., 2011). Moreover, most experts agree that the number of actual suicides is at least several times higher than the number officially reported
because many self-inflicted deaths are attributed in official records to other, more “respectable” causes (e.g., O’Donnell & Farmer, 1995; M. M. Silverman, 1997). In addi- tion to completed suicides, estimates are that approximately half a million people attempt suicide each year and that nearly 3 percent of Americans have made a suicide attempt at some time in their lives (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). Approximately 9 percent have experienced suicidal ideation or thoughts (Nock et al., 2008). Statistics, however accurate, cannot begin to convey the tragedy of suicide in human terms. Most people who commit suicide are ambivalent about taking their own lives and make this irreversible choice when they are alone and in a state of severe psychological distress and anguish, unable to see their problems objectively or to evaluate alternative courses of action. Thus one tragedy is that many do not really want to die. A sec- ond tragic concern arises from the long-lasting distress among those left behind. Studies of survivors show that the loss of a loved one through suicide “is one of the greatest burdens indi- viduals and families may endure” (Dunne, 1992, p. 222). In the discussion that follows, we will focus on various aspects of the incidence and clinical picture of suicide, on factors that appear to be of causal significance, on degrees of intent and ways of communicating it, and on issues of treatment and pre- vention. Who commits suicide? What are the motives for taking one’s own life? What general sociocultural variables appear to be relevant to an understanding of suicide? These are the questions we will consider next.  Who Attempts and Who Commits Suicide?  Until recently,   suicide attempts   were most common in people between 25 and 44 years old (Stolberg et al., 2002), but it is now people between 18 and 24 years old who have the highest rates (Kessler, Berglund, Borges et al., 2005). In the United States, women are about three times as likely to   attempt  suicide as men (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Holma et al., 2010). Rates of suicide attempts are also about three or four times higher in people who are sepa- rated or divorced than in those with any other marital status. Most attempts occur in the context of interpersonal discord or other severe life stress. The story is different, however, for   completed suicides , which are far less frequent than suicide attempts. In the United States, recent reports indicate that suicide was the seventh leading cause of death for men (accounting for 2.3 percent of total deaths), whereas it was the 15th leading cause of death for women (accounting for 0.6 percent of total deaths; Kochanek et al., 2011). The only exception to these patterns of gen- der differences seems to be in people who have bipolar disorder, among whom as many, or even more, women as men actually complete suicide (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007; Tondo et al., 2003). The highest rate of completed suicides is in the elderly (aged 65 and over). Although these rates had been coming down since 1930, especially for elderly men (Stolberg et al., 2002), the 1980s and 1990s saw a trend back upward. Among elderly victims, a high proportion are divorced or widowed or suffer from a chronic physical illness that can lead to increased risk for suicide, very often because the person is depressed (Conwell, Duberstein, & Caine, 2002). However, full-blown mental disorders are relatively rare in those elderly persons who commit suicide compared to their prevalence among people in younger age groups who commit suicide (Har- wood et al., 2006). For women, the method most commonly used is drug ingestion; men tend to use methods more likely to be lethal, particularly gunshot, which may be a good part of the reason why completed suicides are higher among men. Besides the elderly, those with mood disorders, and sepa- rated or divorced people, there are a number of other high-risk groups among adults. For example, people with fairly severe and recurrent mood disorders have the highest risk of suicide (about a 15 percent lifetime risk). Those with less severe forms of mood disorders show only a somewhat elevated risk (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). Some researchers have estimated that people with schizophrenia have about a 10 to 13 percent risk, and those hospitalized for alcohol dependence have about a 3 to 4 percent risk, relative to the average risk of 1.4 percent in the general population (e.g., Haas, 1997; Joiner et al., 2005; Stolberg et al., 2002). Rates of attempted and completed sui- cides are also elevated in individuals with borderline personality disorder and antisocial personality disorder (see  0). Furthermore, a history of conduct disorder has been found to be a strong predictor of suicide attempts as well (Borges et al., 2010). In addition, risk for different suicidal behaviors may differ as a function of psychopathology. For example, in the National Comorbidity Survey-Replication, major depression was found to be the strongest risk factor for suicidal ideation  Ernest Hemingway (left) committed suicide on July 2, 1961. Thirty-five years later to the day, his granddaughter Margaux (right) took her own life as well. The Heming- way family has endured five suicides over four generations—Ernest’s father Clar- ence, Ernest and his siblings Ursula and Leicester, and granddaughter Margaux.
but not for suicide plans or attempts among individuals with ideation (Nock, Hwang et al., 2010). In contrast, anxiety, impulse-control, and substance use disorders were the strongest predictors of suicide plans and attempts. Finally, people living alone or with low levels of perceived social support and people from socially disorganized areas are also at heightened risk (e.g., Holma et al., 2010). Certain highly creative or successful scientists, health professionals (e.g., physicians and psycholo- gists), business people, composers, writers, and artists are also at higher-than-average risk (Jamison, 1999). Recently in the United States suicide rates have been tragically high among people in the military after they have returned from combat in Iraq or Afghanistan; PTSD has often been implicated as play- ing a role.  Suicide in Children  A very disturbing trend is that rates of completed suicide among children, while still very low, have been increasing (Stolberg et al., 2002; van Orden et al., 2008). Suicide in children under age 10 is extremely rare. In children between ages 10 to 14 suicide is also rare in absolute terms (accounting for approximately 5 percent of deaths) but is nevertheless the fourth leading cause of death in the United States for this age group (Kochanek et al., 2011). Further, the trend is by no means limited to those from deprived or troubled backgrounds. Children are at increased risk for suicide if they have lost a parent or have been abused (Jamison, 1999). Several forms of psychopathology—depression, antisocial behavior, and high impulsivity—are also known to be risk factors for suicide in children.  Suicide in Adolescents and young Adults  For people between the ages of 15 and 24, the rate of success- ful suicides essentially tripled between the mid-1950s and the mid-1980s. Suicide now ranks as the third most common cause of death in the United States for 15- to 19-year-olds (after acci- dents and homicide), accounting for approximately 11 percent of total deaths (Kochanek et al., 2011). The increases in suicide rates for adolescents are not unique to this country but, rather, have been observed in most of the many countries studied (Jamison, 1999). As for suicide attempts, one large survey of 15,000 high school students across 32 states has estimated the rates of self- reported suicide attempts within a 12-month period to be an alarming 8.5 percent, with about twice that many report- ing that they have at least seriously considered it (Spirito & Esposito-Smythers, 2006). In recent years, these have been the highest rates of suicide attempts at any point in the human life span. Most of these attempts have very low lethality and do not require medical attention, but they do need to be taken seri- ously. Indeed, prior suicide attempts have occurred in about 25 to 33 percent of completed suicides. Suicide rates in college students are also high, and it is the second leading cause of death in this group. One large survey found that about 10 percent of college students had seriously contemplated suicide in the past year and that most of these attempters had had some sort of plan (Jamison, 1999).  kNOWN riSk FACTOrS FOr ADOLESCENT SuiCiDE   Stud- ies have found that mood disorders, conduct disorder, and substance abuse (especially alcohol) are relatively more common in both completers and nonfatal attempters. Among those with two or more of these disorders, risk for completion increases. Unfortunately, recent evidence suggests that treatment of adoles- cent mood disorders with antidepressant medication also seems to produce a very slightly increased risk for suicidal ideation (or thoughts) and behavior in children and adolescents, and so now pharmaceutical companies must put warnings to this effect on these medications (e.g., Whittington et al., 2005). Why has there been such a surge in suicide attempts and completed suicides in adolescence? One obvious reason is that this is a period during which depression, anxiety, alco- hol and drug use, and conduct disorder problems also show increasing prevalence, and these are all factors associated with increased risk for suicide (e.g., Evans, Hawton, & Rodham, 2004). Increased availability of firearms has also probably played a role as well. Exposure to suicides (especially those of celebrities) through the media, where they are often portrayed in dramatic terms, has probably also contributed to these aggregate increases in adolescent suicide, perhaps because adolescents are highly susceptible to suggestion and imitative behavior (Hawton & Williams, 2002; Jamison, 1999). One review estimated that between 1 and 13 percent of adolescent suicides occur as a result of contagion factors (Velting & Gould, 1997). Finally, the fact that the media rarely discuss the mental disorders suffered by the suicide victims may further increase the likelihood of imitation. Many college students also seem very vulnerable to the development of suicidal ideation and plans. The combined stressors of academic demands, social interaction problems, and career choices—perhaps interacting with challenges to their basic values—evidently make it impossible for some students to con- tinue making the adjustments their life situations demand. For an overview of warning signs for student suicide, see “The World Around Us” box on p. 255.  Other Psychosocial Factors Associated with Suicide  The most frequently discussed personality traits associated with suicide are impulsivity (especially a lack of premedita- tion), aggression, pessimism, and negative affectivity, which all seem to increase the risk for suicide (Hawton, 2005; Oquendo et al., 2004; Yen et al., 2009). Though the specific factors that lead a person to suicide may take many forms,
suicide is often associated with negative events such as severe financial reversals, imprisonment, and interpersonal crises of various sorts. For example, rates of suicide rose sharply (i.e., quadrupled) in the United States, Great Britain, and Hong Kong from 2008 to 2010 after the economic crisis took hold in 2007. Some believe the common denominator may be that these events lead either to the loss of a sense of mean- ing in life or to hopelessness about the future, both of which can produce a mental state that looks to suicide as a possible way out. However, hopelessness about the future may be a better long-term predictor of suicide (say, 1 or 2 years later) than it is for the short term (for instance, weeks or months later; Coryell & Young, 2005; Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). There is also initial evidence that people who have a strong implicit association between the self and death or suicide are at elevated risk of future suicide attempts, even over and above the effects of other known risk factors (Nock et al., 2010). Other symptoms that seem to predict suicide more reliably in the short term in patients with major depres- sion include severe anxiety, panic attacks, severe anhedonia (inability to experience pleasure), global insomnia, delu- sions, and alcohol abuse (Busch et al., 2003; Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). Indeed, in one study of 76 people who had committed suicide while being hospitalized, the hospital records revealed that 79 percent of these people had been severely anxious and agitated in the week prior to commit- ting suicide (Busch et al., 2003). Shneidman, a leading suicidologist for over 35 years, has written extensively about the “suicidal mind.” For example, he wrote,  In almost every case suicide is caused by . . . psychological pain, or “psychache.” . . . Suicidal death, in other words, is an escape from pain. . . . Pain is nature’s great signal. Pain warns us; pain both mobilizes us and saps our strength; pain, by its very nature, makes us want to stop it or escape from it. . . . Psychache is the hurt, anguish, or ache that takes hold in the mind . . . the pain of excessively felt shame, guilt, fear, anxiety, loneliness, angst, and dread of growing old or of dying badly. . . . [I]ts introspective reality is undeniable. Suicide happens when the psychache is deemed unbearable and death is actively sought to stop the unceasing flow of painful consciousness. (Shneidman, 1997, pp. 23, 24, 29)  But what psychological factors lead one to this state? Research indicates that suicide is the end product of a long sequence of events that begins in childhood. People who become suicidal often come from backgrounds in which there was some combination of a good deal of family psychopathology, child maltreatment, and family instability (e.g., Borges et al., 2010; Molnar et al., 2001). These early experiences are in turn associ- ated with the child (and later the adult) having low self-esteem, hopelessness, and poor problem-solving skills. Such experiences may affect the person’s cognitive functioning in a very negative  the WorlD around us  Warning Signs for Student Suicide  A marked change in a student’s mood and behavior may be a significant warning of possible suicide. Charac- teristically, the student becomes depressed and with- drawn, undergoes a marked decline in self-esteem, and shows deterioration in personal hygiene. He or she may also show uncharacteristically impulsive or reckless behavior, including self-mutilating behavior. The student may also write about death or suicide. These signs are accompanied by a profound loss of interest in studies. Often he or she stops attending classes and stays at home most of the day. The student’s distress is usually communicated to at least one other person, often in the form of a veiled suicide warning. When college students attempt suicide, one of the first explana- tions to occur to those around them is that they may have been doing poorly in school. As a group, however, they are superior students, and although they tend to expect a great deal of themselves in terms of academic achievement, their grades and academic competition are not regarded as significant precipitat- ing stressors. Also, although many lose interest in their studies before becoming suicidal and thus receive worse grades, this loss of interest appears to be associated with depression and withdrawal caused by other problems. Moreover, in that minor- ity of cases where academic failure does appear to trigger sui- cidal behavior, the underlying cause of the behavior seems to be loss of self-esteem and failure to live up to parental expectations rather than academic failure itself. For most suicidal students, both male and female, the major precipitating stressor appears to be either the failure to estab- lish, or the loss of, a close interpersonal relationship. Often the breakup of a romance is the key precipitating factor. It has also been noted that significantly more suicide attempts and suicides are made by students from families that have experienced sepa- ration, divorce, or the death of a parent. Although most colleges and universities have mental health facili- ties to assist distressed students, few suicidal students seek profes- sional help. Thus it is of vital importance for those around a suicidal student to notice any warning signs and try to obtain assistance.
way, and these cognitive deficits may in turn mediate the link with suicidal behavior (e.g., Yang & Clum, 1996).  Biological Causal Factors  There is strong evidence that suicide sometimes runs in families and that genetic factors may play a role in the risk for suicide (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). For example, averaging across 22 studies, the concordance rate for suicide in identical twins is about three times higher than that in fraternal twins (Baldes- sarini & Hennen, 2004). Moreover, this genetic vulnerability seems to be at least partly independent of the genetic vulnerabil- ity for major depression (e.g., Brezo et al., 2010). There is also increasing evidence that this genetic vulner- ability may be linked to the neurochemical correlates of suicide that have now been found in numerous studies. Specifically, suicide victims often have alterations in serotonin function- ing, with reduced serotonergic activity being associated with increased suicide risk—especially for violent suicide. Such studies have been conducted not only in postmortem studies of suicide victims but also in people who have made suicide attempts and survived. This association appears to be indepen- dent of psychiatric diagnosis, including suicide victims with depression, schizophrenia, and personality disorders. People hospitalized for a suicide attempt who have low serotonin lev- els are also 10 times more likely to kill themselves in the next year than are those without low serotonin levels. Several stud- ies have tried to document an association between suicide and the short allele serotonin-transporter gene (which controls the uptake of serotonin from the synapse), previously discussed as being implicated in the vulnerability to depression. Although not all studies have found positive results, a quantitative review of these studies did find that people with one or two copies of the short allele are at heightened risk for suicide following stressful life events (Lin & Tsai, 2004). There is also growing support for associations between additional serotonergic gene variants and suicide attempts (Brezo et al., 2010).  Sociocultural Factors  Substantial differences in suicide rates occur among differ- ent ethnic or racial groups in the United States. For example, whites have significantly higher rates of suicide than African Americans, except among young males, where rates are similar between white and African American men (see Figure 7.10). Only young Native American men show a suicide rate similar to that of white males.  85+ 10–14  Black male White male  15–19 5–9   20–24 25–29 30–34 35–39 40–44 45–49 50–54 55–59 60–64 65–69 70–74 75–79 80–84  Suicide rate per   100,000  Age groups  0 70 60 50 40 30 20 10  U.S. Suicide Rates by Age, Gender, and Racial Group  White female Black female  figure   7.10  u.S. Suicide rates by Age, Gender, and racial Group   Suicide rates are higher in males than in females and higher in whites than in African Americans.  Source: National Institute of Mental Health, October 20, 2002. Data: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics.  Kurt Cobain, lead vocalist of the rock band Nirvana, died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound on April 8, 1994. He left behind his wife, Courtney Love, and their daughter, Frances, to deal with the emotional burden of his suicide. Forty to sixty percent of those who suc- cessfully commit suicide are depressed.
Suicide rates also appear to vary considerably from one soci- ety to another. The United States has a rate of approximately 11 per 100,000. Countries with low rates (less than 9 per 100,000) include Greece, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom (Maris et al., 2000). In contrast, Hungary, with an annual incidence of more than 40 per 100,000, has the world’s highest rate (almost four times that of the United States). Other Western countries with high suicide rates—20 per 100,000 or higher—are Switzerland, Finland, Austria, Sweden, Denmark, and Germany. Rates in Japan and China are also high; indeed, in China the estimated suicide rate is three times the global average (Hesketh et al., 2002). Moreover, almost 30 percent of suicides worldwide are estimated to occur in China and India (WHO, 2009). Some have estimated the global mortality from suicide at 16 to 18 per 100,000 (Mathers et al., 2006; WHO, 2009). These estimates should, however, be considered in light of the fact that there are wide differences across countries in the criteria used for deter- mining whether a death was due to suicide, and such differences may well contribute to the apparent differences in suicide rates. Religious taboos concerning suicide and the attitudes of a society toward death are also apparently important determinants of suicide rates. Both Catholicism and Islam strongly condemn suicide, and suicide rates in Catholic and Islamic countries are correspondingly low. In fact, most societies have developed strong sanctions against suicide, and many still regard it as a crime as well as a sin. Japan is one of the few societies in which suicide has been socially approved under certain circumstances—such as condi- tions that bring disgrace to an individual or group. During World War II, many Japanese villagers and Japanese military personnel were reported to have committed mass suicide when faced with defeat and imminent capture by Allied forces. There were also reports of group suicide by Japanese military personnel under threat of defeat. In the case of the kamikaze, approximately 1,000 young Japanese pilots deliberately crashed their explosives-laden planes into American warships during the war’s final stages as a way of demonstrating complete per- sonal commitment to the national purpose. Comparable acts of self-destruction occur today in the Middle East, where Muslim extremists and terrorists all too often commit suicide in order to ensure that a bomb explodes in a designated target area. In the case of the Al Qaeda attacks on September 11, 2001, terrorists took over commercial jets and then flew them into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, killing themselves and over 3,000 innocent people. A few years later in Iraq, after the fall of Saddam Hussein, suicide bombers formed a major part of the insurgency in Iraq against U.S. and other foreign soldiers, as well as against members of Iraq’s newly formed government forces. There are also interesting cross-cultural gender differences in whether men or women are more likely to attempt and complete suicide. Although women are more likely to attempt and men to complete suicide in the United States, in India, Poland, and Finland men are more likely than women to engage in nonfatal suicide attempts. In China, India, and Papua New Guinea, women are more likely to complete suicide than men (Canetto, 1997; Jamison, 1999). In a pioneering study of sociocultural factors in suicide, the French sociologist Emile Durkheim (1897/1951) attempted to relate differences in suicide rates to differences in group cohe- siveness. Analyzing records of suicides in different countries and during different historical periods, Durkheim concluded that the greatest deterrent to committing suicide in times of personal stress is a sense of involvement and identity with other people. More contemporary studies tend to confirm this idea, showing, for example, that being married and having children tends to protect one from suicide (Maris, 1997; Stolberg et al., 2002). Durkheim’s views also seem relevant to understanding the higher incidence of suicide among individuals subjected to con- ditions of uncertainty and social disorganization in the absence of strong group ties. For example, there is a well-known associa- tion between unemployment and suicide (especially for men), which may well be related to the effects that unemployment has on mental health (Gunnell, 2005; Jamison, 1999). Similarly, sui- cide rates have been found to be higher among groups subject to severe social pressures. For example, in 1932, at the height of the Great Depression in the United States, the suicide rate increased from less than 10 to 17.4 per 100,000.  in review  •   Which groups of people are most likely to attempt suicide, and which groups are most likely to complete suicide? What are some of the major precipitants of suicide?  •   Summarize the psychological, biological, and sociocultural causal factors associated with suicide.  Suicidal Ambivalence  Ambivalence often accompanies thoughts of suicide. Some people (most often women) do not really wish to die but instead want to communicate a dramatic message to others concerning their distress. Their suicide attempts tend to involve nonlethal methods such as minimal drug ingestion or minor wrist cutting. They usually arrange matters so that intervention by others is almost inevitable. In stark contrast, a small minority of suicidal people are seemingly intent on dying. They give little or no warning of their intent, and they generally rely on the more vio- lent and certain means of suicide such as shooting themselves or jumping from high places. A third subset of people are ambiva- lent about dying and tend to leave the question of death to fate. A person in this group may entertain and tend to use methods that are often dangerous but moderately slow acting, such as drug ingestion. The feeling during such attempts can be summed up as, “If I die, the conflict is settled, but if I am rescued that is what was meant to be.” After an unsuccessful attempt, a marked reduction in emotional turmoil usually occurs, especially if the attempt was
expected to be lethal, such as jumping in front of a moving train. This reduction in turmoil is usually not stable, however, and subsequent suicidal behavior may follow (e.g., Holma et al., 2010). In the year after a suicide attempt, repetition of the behavior occurs in 15 to 25 percent (Zahl & Hawton, 2004b) of cases, and there is an increased risk that the second or third attempt will be fatal, especially if the first attempt was a serious one. Long-term follow-ups of those who have made a suicide attempt show that about 7 to 10 percent will eventually die by suicide, a risk about five times greater than the average risk of 1.4 percent (Stolberg et al., 2002). Of people who do kill them- selves, about 20 to 40 percent have a history of one or more pre- vious attempts; however, more than half of those who commit suicide have no previous attempts (Stolberg et al., 2002; Zahl & Hawton, 2004b).  Communication of Suicidal intent  Research has clearly disproved the tragic belief that those who threaten to take their lives seldom do so. One review of many studies conducted around the world that involved interview- ing friends and relatives of people who had committed suicide revealed that more than 40 percent had communicated their suicidal intent in very clear and specific terms and that another 30 percent had talked about death or dying in the months pre- ceding their suicide. These communications were usually made to several people and occurred a few weeks or months before the suicide (D. C. Clark, 1995). Nevertheless, most of those inter- viewed said the suicide came as a surprise. It is also interesting that most of these communications of intent were to friends and family members and not to mental health professionals. Indeed, nearly 50 percent of people who die by suicide have never seen a mental health professional in their lifetime, and only about 20 percent are under the care of one at the time of their death (Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). On the other hand, if a clinician knows that someone has been suicidal (for example, he or she is being hospitalized for a suicide attempt), he or she should also not take the patient’s denial of suicidal intent as necessarily being valid. One fascinat- ing study of clinical correlates of inpatients who had committed suicide revealed some sobering statistics: Among patients who were being hospitalized for having had either suicidal ideation or intent, nearly 80 percent denied suicidal ideation the last time they spoke with a clinician before actually committing suicide; moreover, over 50 percent of those who committed suicide did so while on a 15-minute suicide watch or under 1-on-1 observa- tion (Busch et al., 2003).  Suicide Notes  Several investigators have analyzed suicide notes in an effort to understand the motives and feelings of people who take their own lives. Several large studies of completed suicides found that only about 15 to 25 percent left notes, usually addressed to relatives or friends (Jamison, 1999; Maris, 1997). The notes, typically coherent and legible, either had been mailed or were found on the person’s body or near the suicide scene. Some notes included statements of love and concern, which may have been motivated by the desire to be remembered positively and to reas- sure the survivor of the worth of the relationship. Occasionally, though, notes contained very hostile content, such as, “I used to love you but I die hating you and my brother too” (Jamison, 1999, p. 78). Although one might think that such notes would express deep and tragic emotions, this is typically not the case. Many notes are often quite short and straightforward: “I am tired of living” or “I could not bear it any longer” or “No one is to blame for this. It’s just that I could never be reconciled with life itself. God have mercy on my soul” (Jamison, 1999, pp. 77–78).  Suicide Prevention and Intervention  Preventing suicide is extremely difficult. Most people who are depressed and contemplating suicide do not realize that their thinking is restricted and irrational and that they are in need of assistance. Rather than seeking psychological help, they are more likely to visit a doctor’s office with multiple vague complaints of physical symptoms that the doctor often does not detect as symptoms of depression or alcoholism. Others are brought to the attention of mental health personnel by family members or friends who are concerned because the person appears depressed or has made suicide threats. The vast majority, however, do not receive the help they desperately need. This is unfortunate because if a person’s cry for help can be heard in time it is often possible to intervene successfully. Currently, there are three main thrusts of preventive efforts: treatment of the person’s current mental disorder(s) as noted above, crisis intervention, and working with high-risk groups.  Treatment of Mental Disorders  One way to help prevent suicide might be through treating the underlying mental disorder(s) the potentially suicidal person has. In the case of depression, such treatment is often in the form of antidepressant medications or lithium. Lithium seems to be an especially powerful anti-suicide agent over the long term (although not in the acute situation; Goodwin & Jamison, 2007). Benzodiazepines can also be useful in treating the severe anxiety and panic that so often precede suicide attempts. Although there is not a great deal of work using cognitive- behavioral treatments for suicide, one important study examined adults who had already made at least one attempt and gave them 10 sessions of cognitive therapy focused on suicide prevention. This treatment was quite beneficial in reducing further attempts (Brown, 2005). In the 18 months subsequent to receiving treat- ment, patients in the cognitive-therapy group were 50 percent less likely to reattempt suicide than patients in the usual care
group, and their depressive and hopelessness symptoms were also lower than those of the usual care group. Subsequent research suggests that cognitive-behavioral therapy for suicide prevention is also feasible for use with adolescents who have attempted sui- cide (Stanley et al., 2009).  Crisis intervention  The primary objective of crisis intervention is to help a person cope with an immediate life crisis. If a serious suicide attempt has been made, the first step involves emergency medical treat- ment, followed by referral to inpatient or outpatient mental health facilities in order to reduce the risk for future attempts (e.g., Stolberg et al., 2002). When people contemplating suicide are willing to discuss their problems with someone at a suicide prevention center, it is often possible to avert an actual suicide attempt. Here the pri- mary objective is to help these people regain their ability to cope with their immediate problems as quickly as possible. Emphasis is usually placed on (1) maintaining supportive and often highly directive contact with the person over a short period of time— usually one to six contacts; (2) helping the person to realize that acute distress is impairing his or her ability to assess the situation accurately and to see that there are better ways of dealing with the problem; and (3) helping the person to see that the present distress and emotional turmoil will not be endless. Since the 1960s, the availability of competent assistance at times of suicidal crisis has been expanded through the establish- ment of   suicide hotlines   for suicide prevention centers. There are now more than several thousand such hotlines in the United States, but questions have been raised about the quality of care offered by the majority of them (e.g., Seeley, 1997). These centers are geared primarily toward crisis intervention, usually via the 24-hour-a-day availability of telephone contact. Suicide hotlines are usually staffed primarily by nonprofessionals who are supervised by psychologists and psychiatrists. The worker attempts to establish the seriousness of the caller’s intent and simultaneously tries to show empathy and to convince the per- son not to attempt suicide. Efforts are also made to mobilize support from family or friends. Unfortunately, good information on the assessment of the effects of these hotlines and suicide pre- vention centers has not revealed much impact on suicide rates.  Focus on high-risk Groups and Other Measures  Many investigators have emphasized the need for broad-based prevention programs aimed at alleviating the life problems of people who are in groups at high risk for suicide (Maris et al., 2000). Few such programs have actually been initiated, but one approach has been to involve older men—a high-risk group—in social and interpersonal activities that help others. Playing such roles may lessen these men’s sense of isolation and meaningless- ness, which often stems from forced retirement, financial prob- lems, the deaths of loved ones, impaired physical health, and feeling unwanted. Other programs have been targeted at young adolescents who are at higher risk because of previous suicidal ideation and behavior or mood or substance-use disorders (Zahl & Hawton, 2004a).  in review  •   What is meant by suicidal ambivalence, and how might it be related to communication of suicidal intent?  •   What are the goals of suicide intervention programs, and how successful do they seem to be?  UnrESolvED issues  Is There a Right to Die?  M ost of us respect the preservation of human life as a worthwhile value. Thus, in our society, suicide is gen- erally considered not only tragic but also “wrong.” Efforts to prevent suicide, however, involve ethical problems. If people wish to take their own lives, what obligation—or right— do others have to interfere? Not all societies have taken the position that others should interfere when someone wishes to commit suicide. For example, the classical Greeks believed in dignity in death, and people who were extremely ill could get permission from the state to commit suicide. Officials of the state gave out hemlock (a poison) to those who received such permis- sion (Humphry & Wickett, 1986). Today, in certain Western European countries such as the Netherlands and Belgium the law allows terminally ill people to be given access to drugs that they can use to commit suicide (Bosshard et al., 2008; Maris et al., 2000). In 1994 the state of Oregon passed the Oregon Death with Dignity Act (ODDA) allowing physician-assisted sui- cide for terminally ill patients who request a prescription for le- thal medications that they will ingest to end their own lives (e.g., Purvis, 2012; Sears & Stanton, 2001). As of 2007 an estimated 341 people had taken their lives under the ODDA. Passage of the ODDA was (and is) highly controversial in the United States and was challenged several times by U.S. At- torney General John Ashcroft in federal courts. So far the law remains in effect even after being reviewed by the Supreme Court, where it was upheld in January 2006. Furthermore, in 2008 Washington became the second state to pass a death with
dignity act, and in Montana a court ruling made it legal as well. Nevertheless, there is still very heated debate all over the coun- try about the right of people who are terminally ill or who suffer chronic and debilitating pain to shorten their agony. One group, the Hemlock Society, supports the rights of terminally ill people to get help in ending their own lives when they wish; the society also provides support groups for people making this decision. Several other groups press related issues at a legislative level. One physician in Michigan, Dr. Jack Kevorkian (1928–2011), helped over 130 gravely ill people commit suicide and, in so doing, tried to get Michigan to pass laws permitting such acts. For years the state tried to block Kevorkian from assisting in any further suicides, and at several points he was even imprisoned, and his medical license revoked, because he refused to obey in- junctions not to assist with any more suicides. In 1998 Kevorkian invited further attention—and prosecution—when he released a videotape to the CBS program   60 Minutes,   and millions watched him assisting in a suicide. He was later charged, and convicted in April 1999, of second-degree murder and was released and paroled for good behavior in 2007 after serving 8 years of a 10- to 25-year term in prison. In spite of Kevorkian’s failure to prompt the passage of laws supporting assisted suicide for such gravely ill individuals (indeed, Michigan passed a law prohibiting assisted suicide!), substantial numbers of people, including many physicians and dying patients, have come to sympathize with this position (Curlin et al., 2008; Purvis, 2012; Wilson, Chochinov et al., 2007; see also Szasz’s 1999 book   Fatal Freedom: The Ethics and Politics of Suicide ). Arguments against this position have included fears that the right to suicide might be abused. For example, people who are terminally ill and severely incapacitated might feel pressured to end their own lives rather than burden their families with their care or with the cost of their care in a medical facility or hos- pice. However, in places where assisted suicide is legal, such as the Netherlands and Oregon, this has not happened. Indeed, physicians in Oregon seem to have become more aware of and sensitive to the needs of terminally ill patients in terms of rec- ommending hospice care and learning more about prescribing the high doses of pain medication needed to relieve suffering (Ganzini et al., 2001). Consistent with this, most patients in Oregon say they are motivated by a loss of autonomy and dig- nity rather than a need for help with pain control (Prokopetz & Lehmann, 2012). But what about the rights of suicidal people who are not termi- nally ill and who have dependent children, parents, a spouse, or other loved ones who will be adversely affected, perhaps permanently (Lukas & Seiden, 1990; Maris et al., 2000), by their death? Here a person’s “right to suicide” is not immediately obvious, and physicians are very unlikely to provide assistance in such cases (Rurup et al., 2005). The right to suicide is even less clear when we consider that, through intervention, many suicidal people regain their perspective and see alternative ways of deal- ing with their distress. Rather than focusing on suicide “prevention,” some have sug- gested suicide “intervention” both as a more appropriate term and as descriptive of a more ethically defensible professional approach to suicidal behavior. According to this perspective, suicide intervention embodies a more neutral moral stance than suicide prevention—it means interceding without the implication of preventing the act—and, in certain circumstances, such as when people are terminally ill, it may even encompass the pos- sibility of facilitating the suicidal person’s objective (e.g., M. M. Silverman, 1997). The dilemma about the prevention concept becomes even more intense when prevention requires that a person be hospitalized involuntarily, when personal items (such as belts and sharp ob- jects) are taken away, and when calming medication is more or less forcibly administered. Sometimes considerable restriction is needed to calm the individual. Not uncommonly, particularly in these litigious times, the responsible clinician feels trapped between threats of legal action on both sides of the issue. Moreover, preventive efforts may be fruitless; truly determined persons may find a way to commit suicide even on a “suicide watch.” Indeed, about 5 percent of all completed suicides are committed by psychiatric patients while they are hospitalized in inpatient psychiatric units that are supposed to help prevent sui- cide (Stolberg et al., 2002). Thus the vexing ethical problems of whether and to what ex- tent one should intervene in cases of threatened suicide have now been complicated by no-less-vexing legal problems. As in other areas of professional practice, clinical judgment is no longer the only consideration in intervention decisions. This is a societal problem, and the solutions—if any—will have to be societal ones.
7.1   What are mood disorders?  •   Mood disorders are those in which extreme variations in mood— either low or high—are the predominant feature. Although some variations in mood are normal, for some people the extremity of moods in either direction becomes seriously maladaptive, even to the extent of suicide.  7.2   What symptoms are characteristic of depressive disorders?  •   Most people with mood disorders have some form of depressive disorder—dysthymia or major depression. Such individuals expe- rience a range of affective, cognitive, motivational, and biological symptoms including persistent sadness, negative thoughts about the self and the future, lack of energy or initiative, too much or too little sleep, and gaining or losing weight.  7.3   What are the causal factors in unipolar mood disorders?  •   Among biological causal factors for depressive disorder, there is evidence of a moderate genetic contribution to the vulnerability for major depression and probably dysthymia as well. Moreover, major depressions are clearly associated with multiple interacting disturbances in neurochemical, neuroendocrine, and neurophysi- ological systems. Disruptions in circadian and seasonal rhythms are also prominent features of depression.  •   Among psychosocial theories of the causes of depressive disorder are Beck’s cognitive theory and the reformulated helplessness and hopelessness theories, which are formulated as diathesis- stress models, and a tendency to ruminate about one’s mood or problems exacerbates their effects. The diathesis is cognitive in nature (e.g., dysfunctional beliefs and pessimistic attributional style, respectively), and stressful life events are often important in determining when those diatheses actually lead to depression.  •   Personality variables such as neuroticism may also serve as dia- theses for depression.  •   Psychodynamic and interpersonal theories of unipolar depression emphasize the importance of early experiences (especially early losses and the quality of the parent–child relationship) as setting up a predisposition for depression.  7.4   What are bipolar disorders?  •   In the bipolar disorders (cyclothymia and bipolar I and II dis- orders), the person experiences episodes of both depression and hypomania or mania. During manic or hypomanic episodes, the symptoms are essentially the opposite of those experienced dur- ing a depressive episode.  7.5   What are the causal factors in bipolar disorder?  •   Biological causal factors probably play an even more prominent role for bipolar disorders than for unipolar disorders. The genetic contribution to bipolar disorder is among the strongest of such contributions to the major psychiatric disorders. Neurochemical imbalances, abnormalities of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, and disturbances in biological rhythms all play important roles in bipolar disorders.  •   Stressful life events may be involved in precipitating manic or depressive episodes, but it is unlikely that they cause the disorder.  7.6   What are the treatments and outcomes for mood disorders?  •   Biologically based treatments such as medications or electro- convulsive therapy are often used in the treatment of the more severe major disorders. Increasingly, however, specific psychoso- cial treatments such as cognitive therapy, behavioral activation treatment, and interpersonal therapy are also being used to good effect in many cases of these more severe disorders as well as in the milder forms of mood disorder. Considerable evidence sug- gests that recurrent depression is best treated by specialized forms of psychotherapy or by maintenance on medications for pro- longed periods.  7.7   What is the clinical picture and the causal pattern of suicide?  •   Suicide is a constant danger with depressive syndromes of any type or severity. Accordingly, an assessment of suicide risk is essential in the proper management of depressive disorders.  7.8   What role does ambivalence play in thoughts of suicide?  •   A small minority of suicides appear unavoidable—chiefly those where the person really wants to die and uses a highly lethal method. However, a substantial amount of suicidal behavior is performed as a means of indirect interpersonal communication.  •   Somewhere between these extremes is a large group of people who are ambivalent about killing themselves and who initiate dangerous actions that they may or may not carry to completion, depending on momentary events and impulses.  7.9   how can suicide be prevented?  •   Suicide prevention (or intervention) programs generally consist of crisis intervention in the form of suicide hotlines. Although these programs undoubtedly avert fatal suicide attempts in some cases, the long-term efficacy of treatment aimed at pre- venting suicide in those at high risk is much less clear at the present time. DSM- 5 DSM 5  summary  7
key terms  attributions   232  behavioral activation treatment   251  bipolar disorder with a seasonal pattern   241  bipolar disorders   212  bipolar i disorder   239  bipolar ii disorder   240  chronic major depressive disorder   221  cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) (cognitive therapy)   250  cyclothymic disorder   238  depression   212  depressogenic schemas   230  double depression   221  dysfunctional beliefs   230  dysthymic disorder   216  electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)   249  hypomanic episode   213  interpersonal therapy (iPT)   251  learned helplessness   232  lithium   248  major depressive disorder   218  major depressive episode   214  major depressive episode with atypical features   220  major depressive episode with catatonic features   221  major depressive episode with melancholic features   220  mania   212  manic episode   213  mixed episode   239  monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOis)   247  mood congruent   220  mood disorders   212  negative automatic thoughts   230  negative cognitive triad   230  persistent depressive disorder   217  pessimistic attributional style   232  rapid cycling   241  recurrence   219  recurrent major depressive episode with a seasonal pattern   221  relapse   219  rumination   233  seasonal affective disorder   221  selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSri)   248  severe major depressive episode with psychotic features   220  specifiers   220  suicide   252  tricyclic antidepressants   247  unipolar depressive disorder   212
8  learning objectives  8.1  What are somatic symptom disorders?  8.2  What is illness anxiety disorder?  8.3  What is conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder)?  8.4  What is the difference between a factitious disorder and malingering?  8.5  What are the primary features of dissociative disorders?  8.6  What is depersonalization/derealization disorder?  8.7  What is dissociative amnesia?  8.8  What is dissociative identity disorder?  Have you ever had the experience, particularly during a time of serious stress, when you felt like you were walking around in a daze or like you just weren’t all there? Or have you known people who constantly complained about being sure they had a serious illness even though medical tests failed to show any- thing wrong? Both of these are examples of mild dissociative and somatic symptoms experienced at least occasionally by many people. However, when these symptoms become frequent and severe and lead to significant distress or impairment, a somatic symptom or dissociative disorder may be diagnosed.   Somatic symptom disorders   (formerly known as   somatoform disorders ) and   dissociative disorders   appear to involve more complex and puzzling patterns of symptoms than those we have so far encoun- tered. As a result, they confront the field of psychopathology with some of its most fascinating and difficult challenges. Unfor- tunately, however, we do not know much about them—in part because many of them are quite rare and difficult to study. As we have seen (Chapter 6), both somatic symptom and dis- sociative disorders were once included with the various anxiety dis- orders (and neurotic depression) under the general rubric   neuroses , where anxiety was thought to be the underlying cause of all neuroses whether or not the anxiety was experienced overtly. But in 1980, when   DSM-III   abandoned attempts to link disorders together on the basis of hypothesized underlying causes (as with neurosis) and instead focused on grouping disorders together on the basis of overt symptomatology, the anxiety, mood, somatic symptom, and disso- ciative disorders each became separate categories.  Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders  The   somatic symptom disorders   lie at the interface between abnormal psychology and medicine. They are a group of condi- tions that involve physical symptoms combined with abnormal thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in response to those symptoms (APA, 2013).   Soma   means “body,” and somatic symptom dis- orders involve patterns in which individuals complain of bodily symptoms that suggest the presence of medical problems but where there is no obvious medical explanation that can satisfac- torily explain the symptoms such as paralysis or pain. Despite a wide range of clinical manifestations, in each case the person is preoccupied with some aspect of her or his health to the extent that she or he shows significant impairments in functioning. In   DSM-IV   a great deal of emphasis was placed on the idea that the symptoms were medically unexplained. In other words, although the patient’s complaints suggested the presence of a medical condition no physical pathology could be found to account for them (Allen & Woolfolk, 2012; Witthöft & Hiller, 2010). In   DSM-5   this idea is less prominent, because it is rec- ognized that medicine is fallible and that a medical explanation for symptoms cannot always be provided. Nonetheless, medi- cally unexplained symptoms are still a key part of some disorders (such as conversion disorder) that we will describe later. Equally key to these disorders is the fact that the affected patients have no control over their symptoms. They are also not intentionally faking symptoms or attempting to deceive others. For the most part, they genuinely believe something is terribly wrong with them. Not surprisingly, these patients are frequent visitors to their primary-care physicians. Sometimes, of course, people do deliberately and con- sciously feign disability or illness. Also placed in the somatic symptoms and related disorders category in   DSM-5   is   factitious disorder.   In   factitious disorder   the person intentionally pro- duces psychological or physical symptoms (or both). Although this may strike you as strange, the person’s goal is to obtain and maintain the benefits that playing the “sick role” (even to the extent of undergoing repeated hospitalizations) may provide, including the attention and concern of family and medical per- sonnel. However, there are no tangible external rewards. In this way factitious disorder differs from   malingering.   In   malingering  the person is intentionally producing or grossly exaggerating physical symptoms and is motivated by external incentives such
as avoiding work or military service or evading criminal prosecu- tion (APA, 2013; Maldonado & Spiegel, 2001). In our discussion, we will focus on four disorders in the somatic symptom and related disorders category. These are (1) somatic symptom disorder; (2) illness anxiety disorder; (3) conversion disorder; and (4) factitious disorder.  Somatic Symptom Disorders  This new diagnosis includes several disorders that were previously considered to be separate diagnoses in   DSM-IV.   The old disorders of (1) hypochondriasis, (2) somatization disorder, and (3) pain dis- order have all now disappeared from   DSM-5 . Most of the people who would in the past have been diagnosed with any one of these disorders will now be diagnosed with a somatic symptom disorder. In each case, individuals must be experiencing chronic somatic symptoms that are distressing to them and they must also be expe- riencing dysfunctional thoughts, feelings, and/or behaviors. In the past, the diagnosis required evidence that the symptoms were medically unexplained. However, as we noted earlier, this is no longer required for the diagnosis (in part because it is very difficult to prove something is medically unexplainable). Instead the focus in   DSM-5   is on there being at least one of the following three features: (1) disproportionate and persistent thoughts about the seriousness of one’s symptoms; (2) persistently high level of anxiety about health or symptoms; and/or (3) excessive time and energy devoted to these symptoms or health concerns (Allen & Woolfolk, 2013). Symptoms have to have persisted for at least six months. Patients with somatic symptom disorder are usually seen in medical clinics. They are more likely to be female, nonwhite, and less educated than are people with symptoms that have an obvious medical basis. Patients with somatic symptom disorder frequently engage in illness behavior that is dysfunctional, such as seeking additional medical procedures or diagnostic tests when the physician fails to find anything physically wrong with them. Whereas most of us are relieved when tests do not reveal any problems, people with somatic symptom disorder are likely to think something was missed and therefore seek help from another physician, leading to needlessly high medical bills due to unnecessary tests, hospitalizations, and even surgeries. High levels of functional impairment are common, as is comorbid psychopathology—especially depression and anxiety. Research suggests that people with somatic symptom disor- ders tend to have a cognitive style that leads them to be hyper- sensitive to their bodily sensations. They also experience these sensations as intense, disturbing, and highly aversive. Another characteristic of such patients is that they tend to think cata- strophically about their symptoms, often overestimating the medical severity of their condition. In the following sections, we will be discussing hypochon- driasis, pain disorder, and somatization disorder. It’s important to note that in   DSM-5 , these disorders were technically dropped and are now part of the somatic symptom disorders. However, the history of and the research on these disorders is still impor- tant to understand.  Hypochondriasis  Approximately 75 percent of people previously diagnosed with hypochondriasis will be diagnosed with somatic symptom dis- order in DSM-5 (APA, 2013). In   hypochondriasis   the person is preoccupied either with fears of contracting a serious disease or with the idea that of having that disease even though they do not. These very distressing preoccupations are thought to all be based on a misinterpretation of one or more bodily signs or symptoms (e.g., being convinced that a slight cough is a sign of lung cancer). Of course the decision that a complaint is hypo- chondriacal and is based on a misinterpretation of bodily signs or symptoms can only be made after a thorough medical evaluation has failed to find a medical condition that could account for the signs or symptoms. Another typical feature of hypochondriasis  A.   One or more somatic symptoms that are distressing or result in significant disruption of daily life.  B.   Excessive thoughts, feelings, or behaviors related to the somatic symptoms or associated health concerns as mani- fested by at least one of the following:  1.   Disproportionate and persistent thoughts about the seri- ousness of one’s symptoms.  2.   Persistently high level of anxiety about health or symptoms.  3.   Excessive time and energy devoted to these symptoms or health concerns.  C.   Although any one somatic symptom may not be continuously present, the state of being symptomatic is persistent (typi- cally more than 6 months).  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Somatic Symptom Disorder   DSM-5
is that the person cannot be reassured by the results of a medical evaluation. In other words, the fear or idea of having a disease persists despite lack of medical evidence. Indeed, these individu- als are sometimes disappointed when no physical problem is found. The condition has to persist for at least 6 months for the diagnosis to be made so as to not diagnose relatively transient health concerns. Not surprisingly, people with hypochondriasis usually first see a medical doctor for their physical complaints. Because they are never reassured for long and are inclined to suspect that their doctor has missed something, they sometimes shop for additional doctors, hoping one might discover what their problem really is. Because they repeatedly seek medical advice (e.g., Bleichhardt & Hiller, 2006; Fink et al., 2004), it is hardly surprising that their annual medical costs are much higher than average (e.g., Fink et al., 2010; Hiller et al., 2004). People with hypochondriasis are generally resistant to the idea that their problem is a psychological one that might be best treated by a psychologist or psychiatrist. Prior to   DSM-5 , hypochondriasis was one of the two most commonly seen somatic symptom disorders with a prevalence in general medical practices of 2 to 7 percent (APA, 2000). Hypochondriasis occurs about equally often in men and women and can start at almost any age, although early adulthood is the most common age of onset. Hypochondriasis is regarded as a persistent disorder if left untreated, although its severity can fluctuate over time. Individuals with hypochondriasis often also suffer from mood disorders, panic disorder, or other types of somatic symptom disorders (Creed & Barsky, 2004). This is one reason why hypochondriasis is now not differentiated from other somatic symptom disorders in   DSM-5 .  MAjor CHArACteriStiCS   Individuals with hypochondriasis tend to be highly preoccupied with bodily functions (e.g., heart beats or bowel movements), or with minor physical abnormali- ties (e.g., a small sore or an occasional cough), or with vague and ambiguous physical sensations (such as a “tired heart” or “aching veins”). They attribute these symptoms to a particular disease and often have intrusive thoughts about it. The diagnoses they make for themselves include cancer, exotic infec- tions, AIDS, and numerous other diseases.  Watch   the   Video   Henry: Hypochondriasis   on  MyPsychLab  Although people with hypochondriasis are usually in good physical condition, they are sincere in their conviction that the symptoms they detect represent real illness. In other words, they are not   malingering —consciously faking symptoms to achieve a specific goals such as winning a personal injury lawsuit. Not surprisingly, given their tendency to doubt the soundness of their doctors’ conclusions (i.e., that they have no medical prob- lem) and recommendations, the relationships they have with their doctors are often marked by conflict and hostility. The following case captures the typical clinical picture in hypochondriasis. It also demonstrates that a high level of medical sophistication does not necessarily protect someone from devel- oping this or a related disorder.  An “Abdominal Mass”   This 38-year-old physician/ radiologist initiated his first psychiatric consultation after his 9-year-old son accidentally discovered his father palpating (examining by touch) his own abdomen and said, “What do you think it is this time, Dad?” The radiologist describes the incident and his accompanying anger and shame with tears in his eyes. He also describes his recent return from a 10-day stay at a famous out-of-state medical diagnostic center to which he had been referred by an exasperated gastroenterologist colleague who had reportedly “reached the end of the line” with his radiol- ogist patient. The extensive physical and laboratory examinations performed at the center had revealed no significant physical disease, a conclusion the patient reports with resentment and disappointment rather than relief. The patient’s history reveals a long-standing pattern of overconcern about personal health matters, beginning at age 13 and exacerbated by his medical school experience. Until fairly recently, however, he had maintained reasonable control over these concerns, in part because he was embarrassed to reveal them to other physicians. He is conscientious and successful in his profession and active in community life. His wife, like his son, has become increasingly impatient with his morbid preoccupa- tion about life-threatening but undetectable diseases. In describing his current symptoms, the patient refers to his becoming increasingly aware, over the past several months, of various sounds and sensations emanating from his abdomen and of his sometimes being able to feel a “firm mass” in its left lower quadrant. His tentative diagnosis is carcinoma (cancer) of the colon. He tests his stool for blood weekly and palpates his abdomen for 15 to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 days. He has per- formed several X-ray studies of himself in secrecy after hours at his office. Source: Adapted with permission from   DSM-IV-TR Casebook: A Learning Companion to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fourth Edition,   Text Revision   (pp. 88–90). Washington, DC: (Copyright © 2002). American Psychiatric Association.  CAuSAl FACtorS   Our knowledge of causal factors involved in somatic symptom disorders, including hypochondriasis, is quite minimal. This is especially true when compared to knowl- edge about the mood and anxiety disorders discussed in the preceding chapters. Currently, cognitive-behavioral views of hypochondriasis are perhaps most widely accepted. These have as a central tenet that it is a disorder of cognition and perception. Misinterpretations of bodily sensations are currently a defining feature of the syndrome, but in the cognitive-behavioral view these misinterpretations also play a causal role. It is believed that
an individual’s past experiences with illnesses (in both him- or herself and others, and as observed in the mass media) lead to the development of a set of dysfunctional assumptions about symp- toms and diseases that may predispose a person to developing hypochondriasis (Marcus et al., 2007; Salkovskis & Warwick, 2001). These dysfunctional assumptions might include notions such as, “Bodily changes are usually a sign of serious disease, be- cause every symptom has to have an identifiable physical cause” or “If you don’t go to the doctor as soon as you notice anything unusual, then it will be too late” (Salkovskis & Bass, 1997, p. 318; see also Marcus et al., 2007). Because of these dysfunctional assumptions, individuals with hypochondriasis seem to focus excessive attention on symptoms, with experimental studies showing that these indi- viduals do in fact have an attentional bias for illness-related information (Owens et al., 2004; see also Jasper & Witthöft, 2011). Although their physical sensations probably do not differ from those in normal controls (Marcus et al., 2007), they perceive their symptoms as more dangerous than they really are and judge a particular disease to be more likely or dangerous than it really is. Once they have misinterpreted a symptom, they tend to look for confirming evidence and to discount evidence that they are in good health; in fact, they seem to believe that being healthy means being completely symptom-free (Rief et al., 1998a). They also perceive their probability of being able to cope with the illness as extremely low (Salkovskis & Bass, 1997) and see themselves as weak and unable to tolerate physical effort or exercise (Rief et al., 1998a). All this tends to create a vicious cycle in which their anxiety about illness and symptoms results in physiological symptoms of anxiety, which then provide further fuel for their convictions that they are ill. If we also consider the secondary reinforcements that individuals with hypochondriasis obtain by virtue of their disorder, we can better understand how such patterns of thought and behavior are maintained in spite of the misery these individuals often experience. Most of us learn as chil- dren that when we are sick special comforts and attention are provided and, furthermore, that we may be excused from a number of responsibilities. Barsky and colleagues (1994) found that their patients with hypochondriasis reported much childhood sickness and missing of school. People with hypochondriasis also tend to have an excessive amount of illness in their families while growing up, which may lead to strong memories of being sick or in pain (Pauli & Alpers, 2002), and perhaps also of having observed some of the secondary benefits that sick people sometimes reap (Cote et al., 1996; Kellner, 1985). Interestingly, one study retested patients with hypo- chondriasis 4 to 5 years later and found that those who had remitted at follow-up had acquired significantly more (real) major medical problems than their nonremitting counterparts (Barsky et al., 1998). In other words, it appears that hypo- chondriacal tendencies were reduced by the occurrence of serious medical conditions. The authors suggested that hav- ing a serious medical illness “served to legitimize the patients’ complaints, sanction their assumption of the sick role, and lessen the skepticism with which they had previously been regarded . . . . As one noted, ‘Now that I know Dr. X is pay- ing attention to me, I can believe him if he says nothing seri- ous is wrong’” (p. 744).  treAtMent oF HypoCHonDriASiS   More than a dozen studies on cognitive-behavioral treatment of hypochondriasis have found that it can be a very effective treatment for hy- pochondriasis (e.g., Barsky & Ahern, 2004; Tyrer, 2011; see also Hedman et al., 2011, for an example of Internet-based Cognitive Behavioral Therapy). The cognitive components of this treatment approach focus on assessing the patient’s be- liefs about illness and modifying misinterpretations of bodily sensations. The behavioral techniques include having patients  Individuals with hypochondriasis are preoccupied with unrealistic fears of disease. They are convinced that they have symptoms of physical illness, but their complaints typically do not conform to any coherent symptom pattern, and they usually have trouble giving a precise description of their symptoms.
induce innocuous symptoms by intentionally focusing on parts of their body so that they can learn that selective percep- tion of bodily sensations plays a major role in their symptoms. Sometimes they are also directed to engage in response preven- tion by not checking their bodies as they usually do and by stopping their constant seeking of reassurance. The treatment is relatively brief (6 to 16 sessions) and can be delivered in a group format. In these studies such treatment produced large changes in hypochondriacal symptoms and beliefs as well as in levels of anxiety and depression.  Somatization Disorder  The   DSM-IV   diagnosis of somatization disorder is another dis- order that has now been subsumed into the broader category of somatic symptom disorder in   DSM-5 .   Somatization dis- order   is characterized by many different physical complaints. To qualify for the diagnosis, these had to begin before age 30, last for several years, and not be adequately explained by inde- pendent findings of physical illness or injury. They also had to have led to medical treatment or to significant life impair- ment. Not surprisingly, somatization disorder has long been seen most often among patients in primary medical care set- tings (Guerje et al., 1997; Iezzi et al., 2001). Indeed, patients with this variant of somatic symptom disorder are enormously costly to health care systems because they often have multiple unnecessary hospitalizations and surgeries (Barsky et al., 2005; Hiller et al., 2003). The   DSM-IV-TR   (APA, 2000) criteria required that patients report a large number of symptoms across a wide range of domains (e.g., 4 pain symptoms, two gastrointestinal symptoms, one sexual symptom and one neurological-type symptom). Thus, to qualify for a diagnosis of somatization disorder, a patient had to have experienced at least 8 out of 33 specified symptoms (Rief & Barsky, 2005). Over time, the rather arbitrary nature of this became increasing apparent and the formal diagnostic criteria began to be modified by many researchers and clinicians (e.g., Rief & Broadbent, 2007). Fol- lowing suit, in   DSM-5   the long and complicated symptom count is no longer required and somatization disorder is now considered to be just another variant of somatic symptom disorder. Another advantage of the recent change in   DSM-5   is that it is no longer necessary for us to be concerned about whether somatization disorder and hypochondriasis are really two dif- ferent and distinct disorders. There are indeed significant similarities between the two conditions. They also sometimes co-occur (Mai, 2004). Some years ago leading researchers in this area expressed concerns about whether somatization disorder and hypochondriasis could really be regarded as sepa- rate disorders (e.g., Creed & Barsky, 2004). Combining them both into a common category in   DSM-5   and considering them to be variants of somatic symptom disorder is probably a wise move. The main features of somatization disorder are illustrated in the following case summary, which also involves a secondary diagnosis of depression.  Not-Yet-Discovered Illness   This 38-year-old married woman, the mother of five children, reports to a mental health clinic with the chief complaint of depression, meeting diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder . . . . Her marriage has been a chronically unhappy one; her husband is described as an alco- holic with an unstable work history, and there have been frequent arguments revolving around finances, her sexual indifference, and her complaints of pain during intercourse. The history reveals that the patient ... describes herself as nervous since childhood and as having been continuously sickly beginning in her youth. She experiences chest pain and report- edly has been told by doctors that she has a “nervous heart.” She sees physicians frequently for abdominal pain, having been diagnosed on one occasion as having a “spastic colon.” In addi- tion to M.D. physicians, she has consulted chiropractors and osteopaths for backaches, pains in her extremities, and a feeling of anesthesia in her fingertips. She was recently admitted to a hospital following complaints of abdominal and chest pain and of vomiting, during which admission she received a hysterectomy. Following the surgery she has been troubled by spells of anxiety, fainting, vomiting, food intolerance, and weakness and fatigue. Physical examinations reveal completely negative findings.  DeMogrApHiCS, CoMorBiDity, AnD CourSe oF illneSS   Somatization disorder usually begins in adolescence and is believed by many to be about three to ten times more common among women than among men. It also tends to occur more among less educated individuals and in lower socioeco- nomic classes. The lifetime prevalence has been estimated to be between 0.2 and 2.0 percent in women and less than 0.2 percent in men (APA, 2000). Somatization disorder very commonly co-occurred with several other disorders including major depres- sion, panic disorder, phobic disorders, and generalized anxiety disorder. It has generally been considered to be a relatively chronic condition with a poor prognosis, although sometimes the disorder remits spontaneously (e.g., Creed & Barsky, 2004).  CAuSAl FACtorS in SoMAtizAtion DiSorDer   Despite its prevalence in medical settings, researchers are still not certain about the developmental course and specific etiology of soma- tization disorder. There is evidence that somatization disorder runs in families and that there is a familial linkage between an- tisocial personality disorder in men (see  0) and soma- tization disorder in women. That is, one possibility is that some common, underlying predisposition, probably at least partly geneti- cally based, leads to antisocial behavior in men and to somatization disorder in women (Cale & Lilienfeld, 2002b; Guze et al., 1986; Lilienfeld, 1992). Moreover, somatic symptoms and antisocial
  symptoms in women tend to co-occur (Cale & Lilienfeld, 2002b). However, we do not yet have a clear understanding of this re- lationship. One possibility is that the two disorders are linked through a common trait of impulsivity. It has also become clear that people with somatization dis- order selectively attend to, and show perceptual amplification of, bodily sensations. They also tend to see bodily   sensations  as somatic   symptoms   (Martin et al., 2007). Like patients with hypochondriasis, they tend to catastrophize about minor bodily complaints (taking them as signs of serious physical illness) and to think of themselves as physically weak and unable to toler- ate stress or physical activity (Martin et al., 2007; Rief et al., 1998).  treAtMent oF SoMAtizAtion DiSorDer   Somatization disorder was long considered to be extremely difficult to treat, and general practitioners experienced a great deal of uncer- tainty and frustration in working with these patients. How- ever, in the past 15 years some treatment research has begun to suggest that a certain type of medical management along with cognitive-behavioral treatments may be quite helpful and that general practitioners can be educated in how to better manage and treat somatization patients and be less frustrated by them (Rosendal et al., 2005; see also Edwards & Edwards, 2010). One moderately effective treatment involves identify- ing one physician who will integrate the patient’s care by see- ing the patient at regular visits (thereby trying to anticipate the appearance of new problems) and by providing physical exams focused on new complaints (thereby accepting her or his symptoms as valid). At the same time, however, the physi- cian avoids unnecessary diagnostic testing and makes minimal use of medications or other therapies (Looper & Kirmayer, 2002; Mai, 2004). Several studies have found that these pa- tients show substantial decreases in health care expenditures over subsequent months and sometimes an improvement in physical functioning (although not necessarily in psychological distress; e.g., Rost et al., 1994). This type of medical manage- ment can be even more effective when combined with cogni- tive-behavioral therapy that focuses on promoting appropriate behavior, such as better coping and personal adjustment, and discouraging inappropriate behavior such as illness behavior and preoccupation with physical symptoms (e.g., Bleichhardt et al., 2004; Mai, 2004).  pain Disorder  The third   DSM-IV   diagnosis subsumed into the new category of somatic symptom disorder is pain disorder.   Pain disorder  is characterized by persistent and severe pain in one or more areas of the body that is not intentionally produced or feigned. Although a medical condition may contribute to the pain, psy- chological factors are judged to play an important role. Indeed psychological factors play a role in all forms of pain. The pain disorder may be   acute   (duration of less than 6 months) or   chronic  (duration of over 6 months). When working with patients with pain disorder it is very important to remember that the pain that is experienced is very real and can hurt as much as pain that comes from other sources. It is also important to note that pain is always, in part, a subjective experience that is private and can- not be objectively identified by others.  When one physician integrates a patient’s care, the physical functioning of patients with somatization disorder may improve. Why should this be?  The experience of pain is always subjective and private, making pain impossible to assess with pinpoint accuracy. Pain does not always exist in perfect correlation with observable tissue damage or irritation. Psycho- logical factors influence all forms of pain.
The prevalence of pain disorder in the general population is unknown. It is definitely quite common among patients at pain clinics. It is diagnosed more frequently in women than in men and is very frequently comorbid with anxiety or mood dis- orders, which may occur first or may arise later as a consequence of the pain disorder. People with pain disorder are often unable to work (they sometimes go on disability) or to perform some other usual daily activities. Their resulting inactivity (including an avoidance of physical activity) and social isolation may lead to depression and to a loss of physical strength and endurance. This fatigue and loss of strength can then exacerbate the pain in a kind of vicious cycle (Bouman et al., 1999; Flor et al., 1990). In addition, the behavioral component of pain is quite malleable in the sense that it can increase when it is reinforced by attention, sympathy, or avoidance of unwanted activities (Bouman et al., 1999). Finally, there is suggestive evidence that people who have a tendency to catastrophize about the meaning and effects of pain may be the ones most likely to progress to a state of chronic pain (Seminowicz & Davis, 2006).  treAtMent oF pAin DiSorDer   Perhaps because it is a less complex and multifaceted disorder than somatization disorder, pain disorder is usually easier to treat. Indeed, cognitive-be- havioral techniques have been widely used in the treatment of both physical and more psychological pain syndromes. Treat- ment programs generally include relaxation training, support and validation that the pain is real, scheduling of daily activi- ties, cognitive restructuring, and reinforcement of “no-pain” behaviors (Simon, 2002). Patients receiving such treatments tend to show substantial reductions in disability and distress, although changes in the intensity of their pain tend to be smaller in magnitude. In addition, antidepressant medications (especially the tricyclic antidepressants) and certain SSRIs have been shown to reduce pain intensity in a manner independent of the effects the medications may have on mood (Aragona et al., 2005; Simon, 2002).  illneSS Anxiety DiSorDer   Illness anxiety disorder is new to   DSM-5 . In this newly identified disorder, people have high anxiety about having or developing a serious illness. This anxiety is distressing and/or disruptive but there are very few (mild) so- matic symptoms. (see the   DSM-5   criteria box below). It is estimated that around 25 percent of people who would have been diagnosed with hypochondriasis in   DSM-IV  will be diagnosed with illness anxiety disorder in   DSM-5   (APA, 2013).  Conversion Disorder (Functional neurological Symptom Disorder)  Conversion disorder   is one of the most intriguing and baf- fling patterns in psychopathology, and we still have much to learn about it. It involves a pattern in which symptoms or deficits affecting the senses or motor behavior strongly sug- gest that the patient has a medical or neurological condition. However, upon a thorough medical examination, it becomes apparent that the pattern of symptoms or deficits cannot be fully explained by any known medical condition. A few typi- cal examples include partial paralysis, blindness, deafness, and pseudoseizures. The person is not intentionally producing or faking the symptoms, Rather, psychological factors are often judged to play an important role because symptoms usually  A.   Preoccupation with having or acquiring a serious illness.  B.   Somatic symptoms are not present or, if present, are only mild in intensity. If another medical condition is present or there is a high risk for developing a medical condition (e.g., strong family history is present), the preoccupation is clearly excessive or disproportionate.  C.   There is a high level of anxiety about health, and the indi- vidual is easily alarmed about personal health status.  D.   The individual performs excessive health-related behaviors (e.g., repeatedly checks his or her body for signs of illness) or exhibits maladaptive avoidance (e.g., avoids doctor appointments and hospitals).  e.   Illness preoccupation has been present for at least 6 months, but the specific illness that is feared may change over that period of time.  F.   The illness-related preoccupation is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as somatic symptom disorder, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, body dysmor- phic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, or delusional disorder, somatic type.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Illness Anxiety Disorder   DSM- 5
  either start or are exacerbated by preceding emotional or inter- personal conflicts or stressors. Early observations dating back to Freud suggested that most people with conversion disorder showed very little of the anxiety and fear that would be expected in a person with a paralyzed arm or loss of sight. This seeming lack of concern (known as   la belle indifférence —French for “the beautiful indifference”) in the way the patient describes what is wrong was thought for a long time to be an important diagnostic cri- terion for conversion disorder. However, more careful research later showed that   la belle indifférence   actually occurs in only about 20 percent of patients with conversion disorder, so it was dropped as a criterion from recent editions of the   DSM  (Stone et al., 2006, 2011). The term   conversion disorder   is relatively recent. Histori- cally this disorder was one of several disorders that were grouped together under the term   hysteria . Freud used the term   conversion hysteria   for these disor- ders (which were fairly common in his practice) because he believed that the symptoms were an expression of repressed sexual energy—that is, the   unconscious conflict   that a per- son felt about his or her repressed sexual desires. However, in Freud’s view, the repressed anxiety threatens to become conscious, so it is unconsciously   converted   into a bodily dis- turbance, thereby allowing the person to avoid having to deal with the conflict. For example, a person’s guilty feelings about the desire to masturbate might be solved by developing a para- lyzed hand. This is not done consciously, of course, and the person is not aware of the origin or meaning of the physical symptom. Freud also thought that the reduction in anxiety and intrapsychic conflict was the “primary gain” that main- tained the condition, but he noted that patients often had many sources of “secondary gain” as well, such as receiving sympathy and attention from loved ones. Authors of   DSM-5  had many suggestions for changing the name of this disorder (e.g., to psychogenic, functional, and dissociative). In the end, a conservative approach was taken and the term conversion disorder was retained, although this is now followed in paren- theses by “Functional neurological symptom disorder” (Stone et al., 2011).  preCipitAting CirCuMStAnCeS, eSCApe, AnD SeConDAry gAinS   Freud’s theory that conversion symptoms are caused by the conversion of sexual conflicts or other psycho- logical problems into physical symptoms is no longer accepted outside psychodynamic circles. However, many of Freud’s astute clinical observations about primary and secondary gain are still incorporated into contemporary views of conversion disorder. Although the condition is still called a conversion disorder, the physical symptoms are usually seen as serving the rather obvi- ous function of providing a plausible bodily “excuse” enabling an individual to escape or avoid an intolerably stressful situation without having to take responsibility for doing so. Typically, it is thought that the person first experiences a traumatic event that motivates the desire to escape the unpleasant situation, but literal escape may not be feasible or socially acceptable. More- over, although becoming sick or disabled is more socially ac- ceptable, this is true only if the person’s motivation to do so is unconscious. Thus, in contemporary terms, the   primary gain   for conver- sion symptoms is continued escape or avoidance of a stressful situation. Because this is all unconscious (i.e., the person sees no relation between the symptoms and the stressful situation), the symptoms go away only if the stressful situation has been removed or resolved. Relatedly, the term   secondary gain , which originally referred to advantages that the symptom(s) bestow beyond the “primary gain” of neutralizing intrapsychic conflict, has also been retained. Generally, it is used to refer to any “exter- nal” circumstance, such as attention from loved ones or financial compensation, that would tend to reinforce the maintenance of disability. Given the important role often attributed to stressful life events in precipitating the onset of conversion disorder, it is unfortunate that little is actually known about the exact nature  A.   One or more symptoms of altered voluntary motor or sen- sory function.  B.   Clinical findings provide evidence of incompatibility between the symptom and recognized neurological or medical condi- tions.  C.   The symptom or deficit is not better explained by another medical or mental disorder.  D.   The symptom or deficit causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning or warrants medical evaluation.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Conversion Disorder   DSM- 5
and timing of these psychological stress factors (Roelofs et al., 2005). However, one study compared the frequency of stressful life events in the recent past in patients with conversion disorder and depressed controls and did not find a difference in frequency between them. Moreover, the greater the negative impact of the preceding life events, the greater the severity of the conversion disorder symptoms (Roelofs et al., 2005). Another study com- pared levels of a neurobiological marker of stress (lower levels of brain-derived neurotropic factor) in individuals with conversion disorder versus major depression versus no disorder. Both those with depression and those with conversion disorder showed reduced levels of this marker relative to the nondisordered con- trols (Deveci et al., 2007). This also provides support for the link between stress and the onset of conversion disorder.  DeCreASing prevAlenCe AnD DeMogrApHiC CHArACteriStiCS   Conversion disorders were once rela- tively common in civilian and (especially) military life. In World War I, conversion disorder was the most frequently diagnosed psychiatric syndrome among soldiers; it was also relatively common during World War II. Conversion disor- der typically occurred under highly stressful combat condi- tions and involved men who would ordinarily be considered stable. Here, conversion symptoms—such as paralysis of the legs—enabled a soldier to avoid an anxiety-arousing combat situation without being labeled a coward or being subject to court-martial. Conversion disorders are found in approximately 50 per- cent of people referred for treatment at neurology clinics. The prevalence in the general population is unknown, but even the highest estimates have been around only 0.005 percent (APA, 2013). Interestingly, this decreased prevalence seems to be closely related to our growing sophistication about medical and psychological disorders: A conversion disorder apparently loses its defensive function if it can be readily shown to lack a medical basis. When it does occur today, it is most likely to occur in rural people from lower socioeconomic circles who are medically unsophisticated. For example, a highly unusual “outbreak” of cases of severe conversion disorder involving serious motor weakness and wasting symptoms was reported in five 9- to 13-year-old girls living in a small, poor, rural Amish community. Each of these girls had experienced substantial psychosocial stressors including behavioral problems, dys- functional family dynamics, and significant community stress from a serious local church crisis (see Cassady et al., 2005). Fortunately, after the caregivers of these girls were educated regarding the psychological nature of the symptoms and given advice to stick with one doctor, minimize stress, and avoid reinforcement of the “sick role,” four of the five girls showed significant improvement over the next 3 months. In the fifth case, the family refused to acknowledge the psychological component of the illness, holding to the belief that the symp- toms were caused by parasites. Conversion disorder occurs two to three times more often in women than in men (APA 2013). It can develop at any age but most commonly occurs between early adolescence and early adulthood (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2001). It generally has a rapid onset after a significant stressor and often resolves within 2 weeks if the stressor is removed, although it commonly recurs. In many other cases, however, it has a more chronic course. Like most other somatic symptom disorders, conversion disorder frequently occurs along with other disorders, especially major depression, anxiety disorders, and other forms of somatic symptom or dis- sociative conditions.  rAnge oF ConverSion DiSorDer SyMptoMS   The range of symptoms for conversion disorder is practically as diverse as it is for physically based ailments. In describing the clinical picture in conversion disorder, it is useful to think in terms of four categories of symptoms: (1) sensory, (2) motor, (3) seizures, and (4) a mixed presentation of the first three categories (APA, 2013).  Sensory Symptoms or Deficits   Conversion disorder can involve almost any sensory modality, and it can often be  Conversion disorders were fairly common during World War I and World War II. The disorder typically occurred in otherwise “normal” men during stressful combat conditions. The symptoms of conversion disorder (e.g., paralysis of the legs) enabled a soldier to avoid high-anxiety combat situ- ations without being labeled a coward or being court-martialed.
  diagnosed as a conversion disorder because symptoms in the affected area are inconsistent with how known anatomical sen- sory pathways operate. Today the sensory symptoms or deficits are most often in the visual system (especially blindness and tunnel vision), in the auditory system (especially deafness), or in the sensitivity to feeling (especially the anesthesias). In the  anesthesias , the person loses her or his sense of feeling in a part of the body. One of the most common is   glove anesthesia , in which the person cannot feel anything on the hand in the area where gloves are worn, although the loss of sensation usually makes no anatomical sense. With conversion blindness, the person reports that he or she cannot see and yet can often navigate about a room without bumping into furniture or other objects. With conversion deaf- ness, the person reports not being able to hear and yet orients appropriately upon “hearing” his or her own name. Such obser- vations lead to obvious questions: In conversion blindness (and deafness), can affected people actually not see (or hear), or is the sensory information received but screened from consciousness? In general, the evidence supports the idea that the sensory input is registered but is somehow screened from explicit conscious recognition (explicit perception).  Motor Symptoms or Deficits   Motor conversion reac- tions also cover a wide range of symptoms (e.g., Maldonado & Spiegel, 2001; see also Stone et al., 2010). For example, conversion paralysis is usually confined to a single limb such as an arm or a leg, and the loss of function is usually selective for certain functions. For example, a person may not be able to write but may be able to use the same muscles for scratch- ing, or a person may not be able to walk most of the time but may be able to walk in an emergency such as a fire where escape is important. The most common speech-related conver- sion disturbance is   aphonia , in which a person is able to talk only in a whisper although he or she can usually cough in a normal manner. (In true, organic laryngeal paralysis, both the cough and the voice are affected.) Another common motor symptom, called   globus hystericus , is difficulty swallowing or the sensation of a lump in the throat (Finkenbine & Miele, 2004).  Seizures   Conversion seizures, another relatively common form of conversion symptom, involve pseudoseizures, which resemble epileptic seizures in some ways but can usually be fairly well differentiated via modern medical technology (Bowman & Markand, 2005; Stonnington et al., 2006). For example, patients with pseudoseizures do not show any EEG abnormalities and do not show confusion and loss of memory afterward, as patients with true epileptic seizures do. Moreover, patients with conver- sion seizures often show excessive thrashing about and writhing not seen with true seizures, and they rarely injure themselves in falls or lose control over their bowels or bladder, as patients with true seizures frequently do. The following case of conversion disorder clearly shows how “functional” a conversion disorder may be in the overall life circumstances of a patient despite its exacting a certain cost in illness or disability.  A Wife with “Fits”   Mrs. Chatterjee, a 26-year-old patient, attends a clinic in New Delhi, India, with complaints of “fits” for the last 4 years. The “fits” are always sudden in onset and usually last 30 to 60 minutes. A few minutes before a fit begins, she knows that it is imminent, and she usually goes to bed. During the fits she becomes unresponsive and rigid throughout her body, with bizarre and thrashing movements of the extremities. Her eyes close and her jaw is clenched, and she froths at the mouth. She frequently cries and sometimes shouts abuses. She is never incontinent of urine or feces, nor does she bite her tongue. After a “fit” she claims to have no memory of it. These episodes recur about once or twice a month. She functions well between the episodes. Both the patient and her family believe that her “fits” are evidence of a physical illness and are not under her control. However, they recognize that the fits often occur following some stressor such as arguments with family members or friends . . . . She is described by her family as being somewhat immature but “quite social” and good company. She is self-centered, she craves attention from others, and she often reacts with irritability and anger if her wishes are not immediately fulfilled. On physi- cal examination, Mrs. Chatterjee was found to have mild anemia but was otherwise healthy. A mental status examination did not reveal any abnormality ... and her memory was normal. An elec- troencephalogram showed no seizure activity. Source: Adapted with permission from   DSM-IV-TR Casebook: A Learning Companion to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,  Fourth Edition,   Text Revision   (pp. 469–70). Washington, DC. (Copyright © 2002). American Psychiatric Association.  iMportAnt iSSueS in DiAgnoSing ConverSion DiSorDer   Because the symptoms in conversion disorder can simulate a variety of medical conditions, accurate diagnosis can be extremely difficult. It is crucial that a person with sus- pected conversion symptoms receive a thorough medical and neurological examination. Unfortunately, however, misdiag- noses can still occur. Nevertheless, as medical tests (especially brain imaging) have become increasingly sophisticated, the rate of misdiagnoses has declined substantially from in the past, with estimates of misdiagnoses in the 1990s at only 4 percent down from nearly 30 percent in the 1950s (e.g., Stone et al., 2005). Several other criteria are also commonly used for distin- guishing between conversion disorders and true neurological disturbances:  • The frequent failure of the dysfunction to conform clearly  to the symptoms of the particular disease or disorder simu- lated. For example, little or no wasting away or atrophy of
a “paralyzed” limb occurs in conversion paralyses, except in rare and long-standing cases.  • The selective nature of the dysfunction. As already noted, in  conversion blindness the affected individual does not usually bump into people or objects, and “paralyzed” muscles can be used for some activities but not others.  • Under hypnosis or narcosis (a sleeplike state induced by  drugs), the symptoms can usually be removed, shifted, or re- induced at the suggestion of the therapist. Similarly, a person abruptly awakened from a sound sleep may suddenly be able to use a “paralyzed” limb.  treAtMent oF ConverSion DiSorDer   Our knowledge of how best to treat conversion disorder is very limited because few well-controlled studies have yet been conducted (e.g., Bowman & Markand, 2005; Looper & Kirmayer, 2002). However, it is known that some hospitalized patients with motor conversion symptoms have been successfully treated with a behavioral approach in which specific exercises are prescribed in order to increase movement or walking, and then reinforcements (e.g., praise and gaining privileges) are provided when patients show improvements. Any reinforce- ments of abnormal motor behaviors are removed in order to eliminate any sources of secondary gain. In one small study using this kind of treatment for 10 patients, all had regained their ability to move or walk in an average of 12 days, and for seven of the nine patients available at approximately 2-year follow-up, the improvements had been maintained (Speed, 1996). At least one study has also used cognitive-behavior therapy to successfully treat psychogenic seizures (LaFrance et al., 2009). Some studies have used hypnosis combined with other problem-solving therapies, and there are some sugges- tions that hypnosis, or adding hypnosis to other therapeutic techniques, can be useful (Looper & Kirmayer, 2002; Moene et al., 2003).  Distinguishing Somatization, pain, and Conversion Disorders from Malingering and Factitious Disorder  Earlier we mentioned that the   DSM   distinguishes between  malingering   and   factitious disorder   on the basis of the feigning person’s apparent goals. Malingering is diagnosed if the person is intentionally producing or grossly exaggerating physical symp- toms and is motivated by external incentives such as avoiding work or obtaining financial compensation. Factitious disorder is diagnosed if the person intentionally produces psychological or physical symptoms, the person’s goal being simply to obtain and maintain the personal benefits that playing the “sick role” (even undergoing repeated hospitalizations) may provide, including the attention and concern of family and medical personnel. In factitious disorder, frequently these patients surreptitiously alter their own physiology—for example, by taking drugs—in order to simulate various real illnesses. Indeed, they may be at risk for serious injury or death and may even need to be committed to an institution for their own protection. The World Around Us box above describes a particularly pathological variation on this theme. In the past, severe and chronic forms of factitious  Virtually all the symptoms of conversion disorder can be temporarily reduced or reproduced by hypnotic suggestion.  Factitious Disorder imposed on Self A.   Falsification of physical or psychological signs or symptoms, or induction of injury or disease, associated with identified deception.  B.   The individual presents himself or herself to others as ill, impaired, or injured.  C.   The deceptive behavior is evident even in the absence of obvious external rewards.  D.   The behavior is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as delusional disorder or another psychotic disorder.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Factitious Disorder   DSM- 5
  disorder with physical symptoms were called “Munchausen’s syndrome,” where the general idea was that the person had some kind of “hospital addiction” or a “professional patient” syndrome. It is sometimes possible to distinguish between a conver- sion (or other somatic symptom) disorder and malingering, or factitiously “sick-role-playing,” with a fair degree of con- fidence, but in other cases it is more difficult to make the correct diagnosis. Persons engaged in malingering (for which there are no formal diagnostic criteria) and those who have factitious disorder are consciously perpetrating frauds by fak- ing the symptoms of diseases or disabilities, and this fact is often reflected in their demeanor. In contrast, individuals with conversion disorders (as well as with other somatic symptom disorders) are not consciously producing their symptoms, feel themselves to be the “victims of their symptoms,” and are very willing to discuss them, often in excruciating detail (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2001, p. 109). When inconsistencies in their behaviors are pointed out, they are usually unper- turbed. Any secondary gains they experience are byproducts of the conversion symptoms themselves and are not involved in motivating the symptoms. On the other hand, persons who are feigning symptoms are inclined to be defensive, eva- sive, and suspicious when asked about them; they are usually reluctant to be examined and slow to talk about their symp- toms lest the pretense be discovered. Should inconsistencies in their behaviors be pointed out, deliberate deceivers as a rule immediately become more defensive. Thus conversion disorder and deliberate faking of illness are considered distinct patterns.  the WORLD around us  Factitious Disorder Imposed on Another (Munchausen’s Syndrome by Proxy)  I n a somewhat bizarre variant of factitious disorder called  factitious disorder imposed on another   (or   Munchausen’s syndrome by proxy ), the person seeking medical help or con- sulting a mental health professional has intentionally produced a medical or psychiatric illness (or appearance of an illness) in another person who is under his or her care (usually a child; e.g., Pankratz, 2006). In a typical instance, a mother presents her own child for treatment of a medical condition she has deliberately caused, disclaiming any knowledge of its origin. Of course, the health of such victims is often seriously endangered by this re- peated abuse, and the intervention of social service agencies or law enforcement is sometimes necessary. In as many as 10 percent of cases, this atypical form of child abuse may lead to a child’s death (Hall et al., 2000). This disorder may be indicated when the victim’s clinical pre- sentation is atypical, when lab results are inconsistent with each other or with recognized diseases, or when there are un- duly frequent returns or increasingly urgent visits to the same hospital or clinic. The perpetrators (who often have extensive medical knowledge) tend to be highly resistant to admitting the truth (McCann, 1999), and it has been estimated that the average length of time to confirm the diagnosis is 14 months (Rogers, 2004). If the perpetrator senses that the medical staff is suspicious, he or she may abruptly terminate contact with that facility, only to show up at another one to begin the entire process anew. Compounding the problem of detection is the fact that health care professionals who realize they have been duped may be reluctant to acknowledge their fallibility for fear of legal action. Misdiagnosing the disorder when the parent is in fact innocent can also lead to legal difficulties for the health care professionals (McNicholas et al., 2000; Pankratz, 2006). One technique that has been used with considerable success is covert video surveillance of the mother and child during hospi- talizations. In one study, 23 of 41 suspected cases were finally determined to have factitious disorder by proxy, and in 56 per- cent of those cases video surveillance was essential to the diag- nosis (Hall et al., 2000). Over a period of 20 months, Jennifer, 8, shown here with her mother, Kathy Bush, was taken to the hospital more than 130 times, under- went 40 surgeries, and amassed over $3 million in medical expenses. Doctors and nurses testified that Jennifer’s condition always wors- ened after her mother visited her daughter at the hospital behind closed doors. In addition, Jennifer’s health had significantly improved since being removed from her mother’s care. The jury was convinced that Kathy Bush was responsible for causing Jennifer’s illnesses. Bush was arrested and diagnosed with Munchausen’s syndrome by proxy.
in review  •   What are the primary characteristics of hypochondriasis, and how does the cognitive-behavioral viewpoint explain their occurrence?  •   What are the symptoms of somatization disorder and of pain dis- order?  •   What are sources of primary and secondary gains involved in conversion disorders, and how is conversion disorder distin- guished from malingering and from factitious disorder?  Dissociative Disorders  Dissociative disorders   are a group of conditions involving disruptions in a person’s normally integrated functions of con- sciousness, memory, identity, or perception (APA, 2013; Spiegel et al., 2013). Included here are some of the more dramatic phe- nomena in the entire domain of psychopathology: people who cannot recall who they are or where they may have come from, and people who have two or more distinct identities or personal- ity states that alternately take control of the individual’s behavior. The term   dissociation   refers to the human mind’s capacity to engage in complex mental activity in channels split off from, or independent of, conscious awareness (Kihlstrom, 1994, 2001, 2005). The concept of dissociation was first promoted over a century ago by the French neurologist Pierre Janet (1859–1947). We all dissociate to a degree some of the time. Mild dissocia- tive symptoms occur when we daydream or lose track of what is going on around us, when we drive miles beyond our destination without realizing how we got there, or when we miss part of a conversation we are engaged in. As these everyday examples sug- gest, there is nothing inherently pathological about dissociation itself. Dissociation only becomes pathological when the dissocia- tive symptoms are “perceived as disruptive, invoking a loss of needed information, as producing discontinuity of experience” or as “recurrent, jarring involuntary intrusions into executive functioning and sense of self” (Spiegel et al., 2011, p. E19). Much of the mental life of all human beings involves automatic nonconscious processes that are to a large extent autonomous with respect to deliberate, self-aware direction and monitoring. Such unaware processing extends to the areas of implicit memory and implicit perception, where it can be demonstrated that all persons routinely show indirect evidence of remembering things they cannot consciously recall ( implicit memory ) and respond to sights or sounds as if they had per- ceived them (as in conversion blindness or deafness) even though they cannot report that they have seen or heard them ( implicit perception ; Kihlstrom, 2001, 2005; Kihlstrom et al., 1993). As we learned in Chapter 3, the general idea of unconscious mental processes has been embraced by psychodynamically oriented clinicians for many years. But only in the past 30 years has it also become a major research area in the field of cognitive psychology (though without any of the psychodynamic implications for why so much of our mental activity is unconscious). In people with dissociative disorders, however, this normally integrated and well-coordinated multichannel quality of human cognition becomes much less coordinated and integrated. When this happens, the affected person may be unable to access infor- mation that is normally in the forefront of consciousness, such as his or her own personal identity or details of an important period of time in the recent past. That is, the normally useful capac- ity of maintaining ongoing mental activity outside of awareness appears to be subverted, sometimes for the purpose of managing severe psychological threat. When that happens, we observe the pathological dissociative symptoms that are the cardinal char- acteristic of dissociative disorders. Like somatic symptom disor- ders, dissociative disorders appear mainly to be ways of avoiding anxiety and stress and of managing life problems that threaten to overwhelm the person’s usual coping resources. Both types of disorders also enable the individual to deny personal respon- sibility for his or her “unacceptable” wishes or behavior. In the case of   DSM -defined dissociative disorders, the person avoids the stress by pathologically dissociating—in essence, by escaping from his or her own autobiographical memory or personal iden- tity. The   DSM-5   recognizes several types of pathological disso- ciation. These include depersonalization/derealization disorder, dissociative amnesia, dissociative fugue (a subtype of dissociative amnesia) and dissociative identity disorder.  Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder  Two of the more common kinds of dissociative symptoms are derealization and depersonalization. We mentioned these in Chapter 6 because they sometimes occur during panic attacks. In   derealization   one’s sense of the reality of the outside world is temporarily lost, and in   depersonalization   one’s sense of one’s own self and one’s own reality is temporarily lost. As many as 50-74 percent of us have such experiences in mild form at least once in our lives, usually during or after periods of severe stress, sleep deprivation, or sensory deprivation (e.g., Khazaal et al., 2005; Reutens et al., 2010). But when episodes of depersonaliza- tion or derealization become persistent and recurrent and inter- fere with normal functioning,   depersonalization/derealization disorder   may be diagnosed. In this disorder, people have persistent or recurrent experi- ences of feeling detached from (and like an outside observer of) their own bodies and mental processes. They may even feel they are, for a time, floating above their physical bodies, which may suddenly feel very different—as if drastically changed or unreal. During periods of depersonalization, unlike during psychotic states, reality testing remains intact. The related experience of derealization, in which the external world is perceived as strange and new in various ways, may also occur. As one leader in the field described it, in both states “the feeling puzzles the expe- riencers: the changed condition is perceived as unreal, and as discontinuous with his or her previous ego-states. The object of the experience, self (in depersonalization) or world (in dere- alization), is commonly described as isolated, lifeless, strange,
  and unfamiliar; oneself and others are perceived as ‘automa- tons,’ behaving mechanically, without initiative or self-control” (Kihlstrom, 2001, p. 267). Often people also report feeling as though they are living in a dream or movie (Maldonado et al., 2002). In keeping with such reports, research has shown that emotional experiences are attenuated or reduced during deper- sonalization—both at the subjective level and at the level of neural and autonomic activity that normally accompanies emo- tional responses to threatening or unpleasant emotional stimuli (Lemche et al., 2007; Phillips & Sierra, 2003; Stein & Simeon, 2009). After viewing an emotional video clip, participants with depersonalization disorder showed higher levels of subjective and objective memory fragmentation than controls (Giesbrecht et al., 2010). Memory fragmentation is marked by difficulties forming an accurate or coherent narrative sequence of events, which is consistent with earlier research suggesting that time distortion is a key element of the experience of depersonalization (Simeon et al., 2008). A number of researchers have noted elevated rates of comor- bid anxiety and mood disorders as well as avoidant, borderline, and obsessive-compulsive personality disorders (e.g., Hunter et al., 2003; Mula et al., 2007; Reutens et al., 2010). Another study of over 200 cases found that the disorder had an average age of onset of 23. Moreover, in nearly 80 percent of cases, the disorder has a fairly chronic course (with little or no fluctuation in intensity; Baker, Hunter, et al., 2003). The case of the foggy student below is fairly typical.  A Foggy Student   A 20-year-old male college student sought psychiatric consultation because he was worried that he might be going insane. For the past 2 years he had experienced increasingly frequent episodes of feeling “outside” himself. These episodes were accompanied by a sense of deadness in his body. In addition, during these periods he was uncertain of his balance and frequently stumbled into furniture; this was more apt to occur in public, especially if he was somewhat anxious. During these episodes he felt a lack of easy, natural control of his body, and his thoughts seemed “foggy” as well . . . . The patient’s subjective sense of lack of control was espe- cially troublesome, and he would fight it by shaking his head and saying “stop” to himself. This would momentarily clear his mind and restore his sense of autonomy, but only temporarily, as the feelings of deadness and of being outside himself would return. Gradually, over a period of several hours, the unpleasant experi- ences would fade . . . . At the time the patient came for treat- ment, he was experiencing these symptoms about twice a week, and each incident lasted from 3 to 4 hours. On several occasions the episodes had occurred while he was driving his car and was alone; worried that he might have an accident, he had stopped driving unless someone accompanied him. Source: Adapted with permission from   DSM-IV-TR Casebook: A Learning Companion to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,  Fourth Edition,   Text Revision   (pp. 270–71). Washington, DC. (Copyright © 2002). American Psychiatric Association. People with derealization symptoms experience the world as hazy and indistinct.  A.   The presence of persistent or recurrent experiences of depersonalization, derealization, or both:  1.   Depersonalization:   Experiences of unreality, detach- ment, or being an outside observer with respect to one’s thoughts, feelings, sensations, body, or actions (e.g., perceptual alterations, distorted sense of time, unreal or absent self, emotional and/or physical numbing).  2.   Derealization:   Experiences of unreality or detachment with respect to surroundings (e.g., individuals or objects are experienced as unreal, dreamlike, foggy, lifeless, or visually distorted).  B.   During the depersonalization or derealization experiences, reality testing remains intact.  C.   The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impair- ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  D.   The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, medication) or another medical condition (e.g., seizures).  e.   The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as schizophrenia, panic disorder, major depres- sive disorder, acute stress disorder, posttraumatic stress dis- order, or another dissociative disorder.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder   DSM-5
The lifetime prevalence of depersonalization/derealization disorder is unknown but has been estimated at 1 to 2 percent of the population (Reutens et al., 2010). Moreover, occasional depersonalization/derealization symptoms are not uncommon in a variety of other disorders such as schizophrenia, borderline personality disorder, panic disorder, acute stress disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (Hunter et al., 2003). Although severe depersonalization/derealization symptoms can be quite frightening and may make the victim fear imminent mental collapse, such fears are usually unfounded. Sometimes, however, feelings of depersonalization are clearly early manifes- tations of impending decompensation and the development of psychotic states ( 3). In either case, professional assis- tance in dealing with the precipitating stressors and in reducing anxiety may be helpful. Unfortunately, however, as of yet there are no clearly effective treatments—either through medication or psychotherapy.  Dissociative Amnesia and Dissociative Fugue  Retrograde amnesia   is the partial or total inability to recall or identify previously acquired information or past experiences; by contrast,   anterograde amnesia   is the partial or total inability to retain new information (Gilboa et al., 2006; Kapur, 1999). Persistent amnesia may occur in several disorders, such as dis- sociative amnesia and dissociative fugue. It may also result from traumatic brain injury or diseases of the central nervous sys- tem. If the amnesia is caused by   brain pathology , it most often involves failure to retain new information and experiences (anterograde amnesia). That is, the information contained in experience is not registered and does not enter memory storage (Kapur, 1999). On the other hand,   dissociative amnesia   is usually lim- ited to a failure to recall previously stored personal information (retrograde amnesia) when that failure cannot be accounted for by ordinary forgetting. The gaps in memory most often occur following intolerably stressful circumstances—wartime combat conditions, for example, or catastrophic events such as serious car accidents, suicide attempts, or violent outbursts (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007; Spiegel et al., 2011). In this disorder, appar- ently forgotten personal information is still there beneath the level of consciousness, as sometimes becomes apparent in inter- views conducted under hypnosis or narcosis (induced by sodium amytal, or so-called truth serum) and in cases where the amnesia spontaneously clears up.   Watch   the   Video   Sharon: Dissociative Amnesia   on   MyPsychLab.  Amnesic episodes usually last between a few days and a few years. Although many people experience only one such episode, some people have multiple episodes in their lifetimes (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007; Staniloiu & Markowitsch, 2010). In typical dis- sociative amnesic reactions, individuals cannot remember certain aspects of their personal life history or important facts about their identity. Yet their basic habit patterns—such as their abilities to read, talk, perform skilled work, and so on—remain intact, and they seem normal aside from the memory deficit (Kihlstrom, 2005; Kihlstrom & Schacter, 2000). Thus the only type of mem- ory that is affected is   episodic   (pertaining to events experienced) or   autobiographical memory   (pertaining to personal events experi- enced). The other recognized forms of memory—semantic (per- taining to language and concepts), procedural (how to do things), and short-term storage—seem usually to remain intact, although there is very little research on this topic (Kihlstrom, 2005; Kihl- strom & Schacter, 2000). Usually there is no difficulty encoding new information (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007). In rare cases a person may retreat still further from real-life problems by going into an amnesic state called a   dissociative fugue , which, as the term implies (the French word   fugue   means “flight”), is a defense by actual flight—a person is not only amnesic for some or all aspects of his or her past but also departs from home surroundings. This is accompanied by confusion  A.   An inability to recall important autobiographical information, usually of a traumatic or stressful nature, that is inconsistent with ordinary forgetting.  note:   Dissociative amnesia most often consists of localized or selective amnesia for a specific event or events; or gener- alized amnesia for identity and life history.  B.   The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impair- ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  C.   The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., alcohol or other drug of abuse, a medication) or a neurological or other medical condition (e.g., partial complex seizures, transient global amnesia, sequelae of a closed head injury/traumatic brain injury, other neurological condition).  D.   The disturbance is not better explained by dissociative iden- tity disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, acute stress disor- der, somatic symptom disorder, or major or mild neurocogni- tive disorder.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Dissociative Amnesia   DSM-5
  about personal identity or even the assumption of a new identity (although the identities do not alternate as they do in dissocia- tive identity disorder). During the fugue, such individuals are unaware of memory loss for prior stages of their life, but their memory for what happens during the fugue state itself is intact (Kihlstrom, 2005; Kihlstrom & Schacter, 2000). Their behavior during the fugue state is usually quite normal and unlikely to arouse suspicion that something is wrong. However, behavior during the fugue state often reflects a rather different lifestyle from the previous one (the rejection of which is sometimes fairly obvious). Days, weeks, or sometimes even years later, such people may suddenly emerge from the fugue state and find themselves in a strange place, working in a new occupation, with no idea how they got there. In other cases, recovery from the fugue state occurs only after repeated questioning and reminders of who they are. In either case, as the fugue state remits, their initial amnesia remits—but a new, apparently complete amnesia for their fugue period occurs. In   DSM-5   dissociative fugue is considered to be a subtype of dissociative amnesia rather than a separate disorder as it was in   DSM-IV . The pattern in dissociative amnesia and dissociative fugue is essentially similar to that in conversion symptoms, except that instead of avoiding some unpleasant situation by becom- ing physically dysfunctional, a person unconsciously avoids thoughts about the situation or, in the extreme, leaves the scene (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007; Maldonado et al., 2002). Thus people experiencing dissociative amnesia and fugue are typically faced with extremely unpleasant situations from which they see no acceptable way to escape. Eventually the stress becomes so intolerable that large segments of their personalities and all memory of the stressful situations are suppressed. Several of these aspects of dissociative fugue are illustrated in the following case.  A Middle Manager Transformed into a Short- Order Cook   Burt Tate, a 42-year-old short-order cook in a small-town diner, was brought to the attention of local police fol- lowing a heated altercation with another man at the diner. He gave his name as Burt Tate and indicated that he had arrived in town several weeks earlier. However, he could produce no official identification and could not tell the officers where he had previ- ously lived and worked. Burt was asked to accompany the offi- cers to the emergency room of a local hospital so that he might be examined . . . . Burt’s physical examination was negative for evidence of recent head trauma or any other medical abnormality . . . . He was oriented as to current time and place, but manifested no recall of his personal history prior to his arrival in town. He did not seem especially concerned about his total lack of a remem- bered past . . . . Meanwhile, the police . . . discovered that Burt matched the description of one Gene Saunders, a resident of a city some 200 miles away who had disappeared a month earlier. The wife of Mr. Saunders . . . confirmed the real identity of Burt, who . . . stated that he did not recognize Mrs. Saunders. Prior to his disappearance, Gene Saunders, a middle-level manager in a large manufacturing firm, had been experiencing considerable difficulties at work and at home. A number of stress- ful work problems, including failure to get an expected promo- tion, the loss of some of his key staff, failure of his section to meet production goals, and increased criticism from his superior—all occurring within a brief time frame—had upset his normal equa- nimity. He had become morose and withdrawn at home and had been critical of his wife and children. Two days before he had left, he had had a violent argument with his 18-year-old son, who had declared his father a failure and had stormed out of the house to go live with friends. Source: Adapted with permission from   DSM-IV-TR Casebook: A Learning Companion to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,  Fourth Edition,   Text Revision   (pp. 254–55). Washington, DC. (Copyright © 2002). American Psychiatric Association.  MeMory AnD intelleCtuAl DeFiCitS in DiSSoCiAtive AMneSiA AnD Fugue   Unfortunately, very little systematic research has been conducted on individuals with dissociative amnesia and fugue. What is known comes largely from intensive studies of the memory and intellectual functioning of isolated cases with these disorders, so any conclusions should be consid- ered tentative pending further study of larger samples with ap- propriate control groups. What can be gathered from a handful of such case studies is that these individuals’ semantic knowledge (assessed via the vocabulary subtest of an IQ test) seems to be generally intact. The primary deficit these individuals exhibit is their compromised episodic or autobiographical memory (Kihlstrom, 2005; Kihlstrom & Schacter, 2000). Indeed, several studies using brain-imaging techniques have confirmed that when people with dissociative amnesia are presented with auto- biographical memory tasks, they show reduced activation in their right frontal and temporal brain areas relative to normal controls doing the same kinds of tasks (Kihlstrom, 2005; Markowitsch, 1999). In a recent review of nine cases of dissociative amnesia for which brain imaging data were available, the authors concluded there was evidence of significant changes in the brains of these patients, mostly centered on subtle loss of function in the right anterior hemisphere—changes similar to those seen in the brains of patients with organic memory loss (Staniloiu & Markowitsch, 2010). However, several cases (some nearly a century old) have suggested that   implicit memory   is generally intact. For example, Jones (1909, as cited in Kihlstrom & Schacter, 2000) studied a patient with dense amnesia and found that although he could not remember his wife’s or daughter’s names, when asked to guess what names might fit them, he produced their names correctly. In a more contemporary case (Lyon, 1985, as cited
in Kihlstrom & Schacter, 2000), a patient who could not retrieve any autobiographical information was asked to dial numbers on a phone randomly. Without realizing what he was doing, he dialed his mother’s phone number, which then led to her identifying him. In one particularly fascinating contem- porary case of dissociative fugue, Glisky and colleagues (2004) describe a German man who had come to work in the United States several months before he had experienced a traumatic incident in which he had been robbed and shot. After the trauma, he wandered along unfamiliar streets for an unknown period of time. Finally, he stopped at a motel and asked if the police could be called because he did not know who he was (and had no ID because he’d been robbed) and could not recall any personal details of his life. He spoke English (with a German accent) but could not speak German and did not respond to instructions in German (which he denied that he spoke). In spite of his extensive loss of autobiographical memory (and the German language), when given a variety of memory tasks, he showed intact implicit memory. Especially striking was his ability to learn German–English word pairs, which he learned much faster than did normal controls, sug- gesting implicit knowledge of German even though he had no conscious knowledge of it. Some of these memory deficits in dissociative amnesia and fugue have been compared to related deficits in explicit percep- tion that occur in conversion disorders. This has convinced many people that conversion disorder should be classified with dissociative disorders rather than with somatic symptom disor- ders. This issue is discussed in more detail in the Thinking Criti- cally About   DSM-5   box below.  Dissociative identity Disorder (DiD)  Dissociative identity disorder (DID) , formerly known as   mul- tiple personality disorder   is a dramatic dissociative disorder in which a patient manifests two or more distinct identities that alternate in some way in taking control of behavior. There is also an inability to recall important personal information that cannot be explained by ordinary forgetting. Each identity may appear to have a different personal history, self-image, and  Starting with Freud and Janet, and for a large portion of the twentieth century prior to the publication of   DSM-III   in 1980, conversion disorders were classified together with dissociative disorders as subtypes of hysteria. When it was determined that  DSM-III   would rely heavily on overt behavioral symptoms rather than on presumed underlying etiology (namely, repressed anxi- ety) for classifying disorders, the decision was made to include conversion disorder with the other somatic symptom disorders. This was because its symptoms were physical ones with no de- monstrable medical basis. However, as Kihlstrom (1994, 2001, 2005) and others have pointed out, this ignores some very important differences between conversion disorders and other somatic symptom disorders. The most important overall differ- ence is that conversion symptoms (but not those of the other somatoform disorders) are nearly always pseudoneurological in nature (blindness, paralysis, anesthesias, deafness, seizures, etc.), mimicking some true neurological syndromes, just as most of the dissociative disorders do. The disorders we currently classify as dissociative disorders (such as dissociative amnesia and DID) involve disruptions in explicit memory for events that have occurred, or who or what one’s identity is, or both. However, it is clear that events occurring during a period of amnesia or in the presence of one identity are indeed registered in the nervous system because they influence behavior indirectly even when the person cannot consciously recollect them (i.e.,   implicit memory   remains at least partially intact in dissociative disorders). Similarly, Kihlstrom and others have argued that the conversion disorders involve disruptions in  explicit pe rception and   action.   That is, people with conversion disorders have no conscious recognition that they can see or hear or feel, or no conscious knowledge that they can walk or talk or feel. However, patients with conversion disorder   can   see, hear, feel, or move when tricked into doing so or when indirect physiological or behavioral measures are used (see Janet, 1901, 1907; Kihlstrom, 1994, 2001, 2005). Thus Kihlstrom (1994, 2001, 2005) and others made a compelling argument that in future editions, the term   conversion disorder   should be dropped and the sensory and motor types of the syndrome should be reclas- sified as forms of dissociative disorders. This way, the central feature of all dissociative disorders would be a disruption of the normally integrated functions of consciousness (memory, perception, and action). Such a proposal is also consistent with observations that dissociative symptoms and disorders are quite common in patients with conversion disorder (e.g., Sar et al., 2004). This proposal was seriously considered and heavily debated by the   DSM-5   task force. In the end, the proponents for moving conversion disorder into the dissociative disorders category did not succeed and in   DSM-5   conversion disorder (at least for now) is still listed as a somatic symptom disorder.  Thinking CRiTiCaLLy about DSM-5  Where Does Conversion Disorder Belong?   DSM- 5
  name, although there are some identities that are only partially distinct and independent from other identities. In most cases the one identity that is most frequently encountered and car- ries the person’s real name is the   host identity . Also in most cases, the host is not the original identity, and it may or may not be the best-adjusted identity. The   alter identities   may differ in striking ways involving gender, age, handedness, handwriting, sexual orientation, prescription for eyeglasses, predominant affect, foreign languages spoken, and general knowledge. For example, one alter may be carefree, fun-loving, and sexually provocative, and another alter quiet, studious, serious, and prudish. Needs and behaviors inhibited in the pri- mary or host identity are usually liberally displayed by one or more alter identities. Certain roles such as a child and some- one of the opposite sex are extremely common. Much of the reason for abandoning the older diagnostic term   multiple personality disorder   in favor of DID was the grow- ing recognition that it had misleading connotations, suggest- ing multiple occupancy of space, time, and people’s bodies by differing, but fully organized and coherent, “personalities.” In fact, alters are not in any meaningful sense personalities but rather reflect a failure to integrate various aspects of a person’s identity, consciousness, and memory (Spiegel, 2006). The term   DID   better captures this. Indeed Spiegel (one prominent theorist in this area) has argued that “the problem is not having more than one personality, it is having less than one” (Spiegel, 2006, p. 567). Alter identities take control at different points in time, and the switches typically occur very quickly (in a matter of seconds), although more gradual switches can also occur. When switches occur in people with DID, it is often easy to observe the gaps in memories for things that have happened—often for things that have happened to other identities. But this amnesia is not always symmetrical; that is, some identities may know more about cer- tain alters than do other identities. Sometimes one submerged identity gains control by producing hallucinations (such as a voice inside the head giving instructions). In sum, DID is a condition in which normally integrated aspects of memory, identity, and con- sciousness are no longer integrated. Additional symptoms of DID include depression, self-mutilation, frequent suicidal ideation and attempts, erratic behavior, headaches, hallucinations, posttraumatic symptoms, and other amnesic and fugue symptoms (APA, 2013; Maldonado et al., 2002). Depressive disorders, PTSD, substance- use disorders, and borderline personality disorder are the most  Chris Sizemore was the inspiration for the book and movie   Three Faces of Eve , which explore her multiple personality disorder (now known as DID). After her recovery, Sizemore worked as an advocate for the mentally ill.  A.   Disruption of identity characterized by two or more distinct personality states, which may be described in some cultures as an experience of possession. The disruption in identity involves marked discontinuity in sense of self and sense of agency, accompanied by related alterations in affect, behav- ior, consciousness, memory, perception, cognition, and/or sensory-motor functioning. These signs and symptoms may be observed by others or reported by the individual.  B.   Recurrent gaps in the recall of everyday events, important personal information, and/ or traumatic events that are inconsistent with ordinary forgetting.  C.   The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impair- ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  D.   The disturbance is not a normal part of a broadly accepted cultural or religious practice.  note:   In children, the symptoms are not better explained by imaginary playmates or other fantasy play.  e.   The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., blackouts or chaotic behavior during alcohol intoxication) or another medical condition (e.g., complex partial seizures).  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Dissociative Identity Disorder   DSM-5
common comorbid diagnoses (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007). One recent study found that among patients with diagnoses of DID, the average number of comorbid diagnoses (based on structured diag- nostic interviews) was five, with PTSD being the most common (Rodewald et al., 2011). DID usually starts in childhood, although most patients are in their teens, 20s, or 30s at the time of diagnosis (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007). Approximately three to nine times more females than males are diagnosed as having the disorder, and females tend to have a larger number of alters than do males (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007). Some believe that this pronounced gender discrepancy is due to the much greater proportion of childhood sexual abuse among females than among males (see  2), but this is a highly controversial point. Many of these features are illustrated in the case of Mary Kendall below.  Mary and Marian   Mary, a 35-year-old divorced social worker, had . . . in her right forearm and hand . . . chronic pain. Medical management of this pain had proved problematic, and it was decided to teach her self-hypnosis as a means whereby she might control it. She proved an excellent hypnotic subject and quickly learned effective pain control techniques. Her hypnotist/trainer, a psychiatrist, describes Mary’s life in rather unappealing terms. She is said to be competent profes- sionally but has an “arid” personal and social life ... . She spends most of her free time doing volunteer work in a hospice ... . In the course of the hypnotic training, Mary’s psychiatrist discovered that she seemed to have substantial gaps in her memory. One phenomenon in particular was very puzzling: She reported that she could not account for what seemed an extraordinary depletion of the gasoline in her car’s tank. She would arrive home from work with a nearly full tank, and by the following morning as she began her trip to work would notice that the tank was now only half-full. When it was advised that she keep track of her odometer readings, she discovered that on many nights on which she insisted she’d remained at home the odometer showed significant accumula- tions of up to 100 miles. The psychiatrist, by now strongly sus- pecting that Mary had a dissociative disorder, also established that there were large gaps in her memories of childhood. He shifted his focus to exploring the apparently widespread dis- sociative difficulties. In the course of one of the continuing hypnotic ses- sions, the psychiatrist again asked about “lost time,” and was greeted with a response in a wholly different voice tone that said, “It’s about time you knew about me.” Marian, an appar- ently well-established alter identity, went on to describe the trips she was fond of taking at night ... Marian was an extraor- dinarily abrupt and hostile “person,” the epitome in these respects of everything the compliant and self-sacrificing Mary was not. Marian regarded Mary with unmitigated contempt, and asserted that “worrying about anyone but yourself is a waste of time.”  the WORLD around us  DID, Schizophrenia, and Split Personality: Clearing Up the Confusion  T he general public has long been confused by the distinc- tion between DID and schizophrenia. It is not uncommon for people diagnosed with schizophrenia to be referred to as having a “split personality.” We have even heard people say such things as, “I’m a bit schizophrenic on this issue” to mean that they have more than one opinion about it! Although this misuse of the term   split personality   actually began among psychiatric professionals, today it reflects the public’s general misunderstanding of schizophrenia, which does not in- volve a “split” or “Jekyll and Hyde” personality at all. The origi- nal confusion may have stemmed from the term   schizophrenia , which was first coined by a Swiss psychiatrist named Bleuler.  Schizien   is German for “split,” and   phren   is the Greek root for “mind.” The notion that schizophrenia is characterized by a split mind or personality may have arisen this way (see McNally, 2007, for a historical review of how this confusion arose). However, this is not at all what Bleuler intended the word   schizo- phrenia   to mean. Rather, Bleuler was referring to the splitting of the normally integrated   associative threads   of the mind—links between words, thoughts, emotions, and behavior. Splits of this kind result in thinking that is not goal-directed or efficient, which in turn leads to the host of other difficulties known to be associ- ated with schizophrenia. It is very important to remember that people diagnosed with schizophrenia do   not   have multiple distinct identities that alter- nately take control over their mind and behavior. They may have a delusion and believe they are someone else, but they do not show the changes in identity accompanied by changes in tone of voice, vocabulary, and physical appearance that are often seen when identities “switch” in DID. Furthermore, people with DID (who are probably closer to the general public’s notion of “split personality”) do not exhibit such characteristics of schizophrenia as disorganized behavior, hallucinations coming from outside the head, and delusions, or incoherent and loose associations (e.g., Kluft, 2005).
  In due course some six other alter identities emerged . . . . There was notable competition among the alters for time spent “out,” and Marian was often so provocative as to frighten some of the more timid others, which included a 6-year-old child . . . . Mary’s history, as gradually pieced together, included memo- ries of physical and sexual abuse by her father as well as others during her childhood . . . . Her mother was described . . . as hav- ing abdicated to a large extent the maternal role, forcing Mary from a young age to assume these duties in the family. Four years of subsequent psychotherapy resulted in only modest success in achieving a true “integration” of these diverse trends in Mary Kendall’s selfhood. Source: Adapted with permission from   DSM-IV-TR Casebook   (pp. 56–57). Washington, DC. (Copyright © 2002). American Psychiatric Association.  The number of alter identities in DID varies tremendously and has increased over time (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007). One early review of 76 classic cases reported that two-thirds of these cases had only two personalities and most of the rest had three (Taylor & Martin, 1944). More recent estimates are that about 50 percent now show over 10 identities with some respon- dents claiming as many as a hundred. This historical trend of increasing multiplicity suggests the operation of social factors, perhaps through the encouragement of therapists, as we discuss below (e.g., Kihlstrom, 2005; Lilienfeld et al., 1999; Piper & Merskey, 2004a, 2004b). Another recent trend is that many of the reported cases of DID now include more unusual and even bizarre identities than in the past (such as being an animal) and more highly implausible backgrounds (e.g., ritualized satanic abuse in childhood).  prevAlenCe—WHy HAS DiD Been inCreASing?   Owing to their dramatic nature, cases of DID receive a great deal of at- tention and publicity in fiction, television, and motion pictures. But in fact, until relatively recently, DID was extremely rare—or at least rarely diagnosed—in clinical practice. Prior to 1979, only about 200 cases could be found in the entire psychological and psychiatric literature worldwide. By 1999, however, over 30,000 cases had been reported in North America alone (Ross, 1999), although as we will discuss later, many researchers believe that this is a gross overestimate (e.g., Piper & Merskey, 2004b). Because their diagnosed occurrence in both clinical settings and in the general population increased enormously in recent years, prevalence estimates in the general population vary. One study of 658 people in upstate New York estimated a 1.5 percent prevalence (Johnson et al., 2006), but it is possible that no such estimates are valid, given how hard it is to make this diagnosis reliably. (For example, recall that Mary’s DID was uncovered only in the course of hypnotic sessions for pain management.) Many factors probably have contributed to the dras- tic increase in the reported prevalence of DID (although in an absolute sense it is still very rare, and most practicing psychotherapists never see a person with DID in their entire careers). For example, the number of cases began to rise in the 1970s after the publication of Flora Rhea Schreiber’s   Sybil  (1973) This increased public awareness of the condition. (Ironi- cally, however, the case has now been thoroughly discredited (see Borch-Jacobsen, 1997; Paris, 2012; Rieber, 1999). At about the same time, the diagnostic criteria for DID (then called multiple personality disorder) were clearly specified for the first time with the publication of   DSM-III   in 1980.This seems to have led to increased acceptance of the diagnosis by clinicians, which may have encouraged reporting of it in the literature. Clinicians were traditionally (and often still are today) somewhat skeptical of the astonishing behavior these patients often display. Another reason why the diagnosis was made more frequently after 1980 is that the diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia were tightened in   DSM-III.   People who had perhaps been inappro- priately diagnosed with schizophrenia could now receive the more appropriate diagnosis of multiple personality disorder. In addition, beginning in about 1980, prior scattered reports of instances of childhood abuse in the histories of adult patients began building into what would become a crescendo. As we will see later, many controversies arose regarding how to interpret such findings, but it is definitely true that these reports of abuse in patients with DID drew a great deal of attention to this dis- order, which in turn may have increased the rate at which it was being diagnosed. Finally, it is almost certain that some of the increase in the prevalence of DID is   artifactual   and has occurred because some therapists looking for evidence of DID in certain patients may suggest the existence of alter identities (especially when the person is under hypnosis and very suggestible; e.g., Kihlstrom, 2005; Piper & Merskey, 2004b). The therapist may also subtly reinforce the emergence of new identities by showing great inter- est in these new identities. Nevertheless, such factors cannot account for all cases of diagnosed DID, which has been observed in most parts of the world, even where there is virtually no per- sonal or professional knowledge of DID, including rural Turkey (Akyuz et al., 1999; see also Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007) and Shanghai, China (Xiao et al., 2006).  experiMentAl StuDieS oF DiD   Much of what is known about DID comes from patients’ self-reports and from therapists’ or researchers’ clinical observations. Indeed, only a small number of experimental studies of people with DID have been conducted to corroborate clinical observations. Moreover, most of these studies have been conducted on only one or a few cases, although very recently a few larger studies have been done that include ap- propriate control groups (e.g., Dorahy et al., 2005; Huntjens et al., 2003, 2007). In spite of such shortcomings, most of the find- ings from these studies are generally consistent with one another and reveal some very interesting features of DID. The primary focus of these studies has been to determine the nature of the amnesia that exists between different identities.
As we have already noted, most people with DID have at least some identities that seem completely unaware of the existence and experiences of certain alter identities, although other identi- ties may be only partially amnesic of some alters (e.g., Elzinga et al., 2003; Huntjens et al., 2003). This feature of DID has been corroborated by studies showing that when one identity (Identity 1) is asked to learn a list of word pairs, and an alter identity (Identity 2) is later asked to recall the second word in each pair using the first word as a cue, there seems to be no transfer to Identity 2 of what was learned by Identity 1. This interpersonality amnesia with regard to conscious recall of the activities and experiences of at least some other identities has generally been considered a fundamen- tal characteristic of DID (Kihlstrom, 2001, 2005; Kihlstrom & Schacter, 2000). Nevertheless, several interesting recent studies, each with about 20 DID patients, have challenged any idea that this interpersonality amnesia is complete, instead sometimes finding partial transfer of explicit memory across identities in certain tasks (Huntjens et al., 2003, 2007, 2012; see also Dorahy & Huntjens, 2007, for a review). As noted earlier, there are kinds of memory other than sim- ply what can be brought to awareness ( explicit memory ). As with dissociative amnesia and fugue, there is evidence that Identity 2 has some   implicit memory   of things that Identity 1 learned. That is, although Identity 2 may not be able to recall consciously the things learned by Identity 1, these apparently forgotten events may influence Identity 2’s experiences, thoughts, and behaviors unconsciously (Kihlstrom, 2001, 2005). This might be reflected in a test asking Identity 2 to learn the list of words previously learned by Identity 1. Even though Identity 2 could not con- sciously recall the list of words, Identity 2 would learn that list more rapidly than a brand-new list of words, an outcome that suggests the operation of implicit memory (e.g., Eich et al., 1997; Elzinga et al., 2003; see Kihlstrom, 2001, 2005, for reviews). Related studies on implicit transfer of memories have shown that emotional reactions learned by one identity often transfer across identities, too. Thus, even though Identity 2 may not be able to recall an emotional event that happened to Identity 1, a visual or auditory reminder of the event (a conditioned stimulus) administered to Identity 2 may elicit an emotional reaction even though Identity 2 has no knowledge of why it did so (e.g., Ludwig et al., 1972; Prince, 1910). Moreover, one study by Huntjens and colleagues (2005) had 22 DID patients in Identity 1 learn to reevaluate a neutral word in a positive or negative manner through a simple evaluative conditioning procedure in which neutral words are simply paired with positive or negative words; the neutral words then come to take on positive or negative con- notations. When Identity 2 was later asked to emerge, he or she also categorized the formerly neutral word in the same positive or negative manner as learned by Identity 1, showing implicit memory for the reevaluation of the word learned by Identity 1 (although complete subjective amnesia was reported by Iden- tity 2). Nevertheless, other sophisticated studies have made it clear that implicit memory transfer across personalities does not always occur, particularly with certain kinds of implicit memory tasks where memory performance may be strongly influenced by the identity currently being tested (e.g., Dorahy, 2001; Eich et al., 1997; Nissen et al., 1988). However, the results that do show implicit memory transfer are very important because they demonstrate that explicit amnesia across identities cannot occur simply because one identity is trying actively to suppress any evi- dence of memory transfer. If this were possible, there would be no leakage of implicit memories across identities (Dorahy, 2001; Eich et al., 1997). An even smaller number of experimental studies have exam- ined differences in brain activity when individuals with DID are tested with different identities at the forefront of conscious- ness. For example, in an early classic study, Putnam (1984) investigated EEG activity in 11 DID patients during different identities, and in 10 control subjects who were simulating differ- ent personality states, in order to determine whether there were different patterns of brain wave activity during different identi- ties (real or simulated), as would be found if separate individuals were assessed. The study found that there were indeed differ- ences in brain wave activity when the patients with DID were in different personality states and that these differences were greater than those found in the simulating subjects (see Kihlstrom et al., 1993; Putnam, 1997). One particularly interesting study by Reinders and col- leagues (2006) examined subjective and cardiovascular activation patterns to both neutral and traumatic memories in 11 people diagnosed with DID. Each patient had one alter with a neutral identity such as the one active when they were functioning in everyday life, and each had another alter with a traumatic iden- tity who had access to traumatic memories. As expected, when exposed to a script of neutral personal memories neither identity displayed much subjective or cardiovascular reactivity. However, when exposed to a script of personal memories of traumatizing events, responding differed in the two identity states. Specifi- cally, the traumatic identity state (but not the neutral identity state) showed subjective and cardiovascular reactivity reflect- ing emotional distress to the personal traumatic memory. Such results could be seen as providing support for the idea that one function of certain alters is to protect the person from traumatic memories that a traumatic identity state has access to.  CAuSAl FACtorS AnD ControverSieS ABout DiD   There are at least four serious, interrelated controversies surrounding DID and how it develops. First, some have been concerned with whether DID is a real disorder or is faked, and whether, even if it is real, it can be faked. The second major con- troversy is about how DID develops. Specifically, is DID caused by early childhood trauma, or does the development of DID involve some kind of social enactment of multiple different roles that have been inadvertently encouraged by careless clinicians? Third, those who maintain that DID is caused by childhood
  trauma cite mounting evidence that the vast majority of indi- viduals diagnosed with DID report memories of an early history of abuse. But are these memories of early abuse real or false? Finally, if abuse has occurred in most individuals with DID, did the abuse play a   causal role , or was something else correlated with the abuse actually the cause?  DiD: real or Faked?   The issue of possible factitious or malingering origins of DID has dogged the diagnosis of DID for at least a century. One obvious situation in which this issue becomes critical is when it has been used by defendants and their attorneys to try to escape punishment for crimes (“My other personality did it”). For example, this defense was used, ultimately unsuccessfully, in the famous case of the Hillside Strangler, Kenneth Bianchi (Orne et al., 1984), but it has prob- ably been used successfully in other cases that we are unaware of (unaware because the person is not sent to prison but rather to a mental hospital in most cases). Bianchi was accused of brutally raping and murdering 10 young women in the Los Angeles area. Although there was a great deal of evidence that he had com- mitted these crimes, he steadfastly denied it, and some lawyers thought perhaps he had DID. He was subsequently interviewed by a clinical psychologist, and under hypnosis a second person- ality, “Steve,” emerged. Steve confessed to the crimes, thereby creating the basis for a plea of “not guilty by reason of insanity” (see  7). However, Bianchi was later examined even more closely by a renowned psychologist and psychiatrist special- izing in this area, the late Martin Orne. Upon closer examina- tion, Orne determined that Bianchi was faking the condition. Orne drew this conclusion in part because when he suggested to Bianchi that most people with DID have more than two iden- tities, Bianchi suddenly produced a third (Orne et al., 1984). Moreover, there was no evidence of multiple identities exist- ing prior to the trial. When Bianchi’s faking the disorder was discovered, he was convicted of the murders. In other words, some cases of DID may involve complete fabrication orches- trated by criminal or other unscrupulous persons seeking unfair advantages, and not all prosecutors have as clever and knowl- edgeable an expert witness as Martin Orne to help detect this. Nevertheless, most researchers think that factitious and malin- gering cases of DID (such as the Bianchi case or cases in which the person has a need to be a patient) are relatively rare.  if DiD is not Faked, How Does it Develop: posttraumatic theory or Sociocognitive theory?   Many professionals acknowledge that, in most cases, DID is a real syndrome (not consciously faked), but there is marked disagreement about how it develops and how it is maintained. In the contemporary literature, the original major theory of how DID develops is   posttraumatic theory   (Gleaves, 1996; Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007; Ross, 1997, 1999). The vast majority of patients with DID (over 95 percent by some estimates) report memories of severe and horrific abuse as children (see Figure 8.1 below). According to this view, DID starts from the child’s attempt to cope with an overwhelming sense of hopelessness and powerlessness in the face of repeated traumatic abuse. Lacking other resources or routes of escape, the child may dissociate and escape into a fantasy, becoming someone else. This escape may occur through a process like self-hypnosis (Butler et al., 1996), and if it helps to alleviate some of the pain caused by the abuse it will be reinforced and occur again in the future. This notion is consistent with recent evidence that inducing a dis- sociative state in research participants can lead to decreased pain sensitivity (Ludascher et al., 2009). Sometimes the child simply imagines the abuse is happening to someone else. If the child is fantasy prone, and continues to stay fantasy prone over time, the child may unknowingly create different selves at different points  figure   8.1  Reported childhood abuse in five separate studies of DID patients (Total   n   =   843).  Sexual   Physical   Either or both  Percentage  100 20 40 60 80 0  Reported Childhood Abuse in Five Separate Studies of DID Patients (Total   N   =   843 )  Putnam et al.,   1986 (100   cases) Ross et al.,   1990 (236   cases) Coons et al.,   1988 (50   cases) Ross et al.,   1991 (102   cases) Schultz et al.,   1989 (355   cases)  Type of abuse
in time, possibly laying the foundation for multiple dissociated identities. But only a subset of children who undergo traumatic experi- ences are prone to fantasy or self-hypnosis, which leads to the idea that a diathesis-stress model may be appropriate here. That is, children who are prone to fantasy and those who are easily hypno- tizable may have a diathesis for developing DID (or other dissocia- tive disorders) when severe abuse occurs (e.g., Butler et al., 1996; Kihlstrom et al., 1993). However, it should also be emphasized that there is nothing inherently pathological about being prone to fantasy or readily hypnotizable (Kihlstrom et al., 1994). Increasingly, those who view childhood abuse as playing a critical role in the development of DID are beginning to see DID as perhaps a complex and chronic variant of posttraumatic stress disorder, which by definition is caused by exposure to some kind of highly traumatic event(s), including abuse (e.g., Brown, 1994; Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007; Maldonado et al., 2002). Anxiety symptoms are more prominent in PTSD than in DID, and dissocia- tive symptoms are more prominent in DID than in PTSD. Nev- ertheless, both kinds of symptoms are present in both disorders (Putnam, 1997). Moreover, some (but not all) investigators have estimated that a very high percentage of individuals diagnosed with DID have a comorbid diagnosis of PTSD, suggesting the likelihood of some important common causal factors (Vermetten et al., 2006; see also Rodewald et al., 2011). At the other extreme from posttraumatic theory is  sociocognitive theory , which claims that DID develops when a highly suggestible person learns to adopt and enact the roles of multiple identities, mostly because clinicians have inadver- tently suggested, legitimized, and reinforced them and because these different identities are geared to the individual’s own personal goals (Lilienfeld & Lynn, 2003; Lilienfeld et al., 1999; Spanos, 1994, 1996). It is important to realize that at the pres- ent time, the sociocognitive perspective maintains that this is not done intentionally or consciously by the afflicted individual but, rather, occurs spontaneously with little or no awareness (Lilienfeld et al., 1999). The suspicion is that overzealous clini- cians, through fascination with the clinical phenomenon of DID and unwise use of such techniques as hypnosis, are themselves largely responsible for eliciting this disorder in highly suggest- ible, fantasy-prone patients (e.g., Giesbrecht et al., 2008; Piper, Merskey, 2004a, 2004b; Spanos, 1996). Consistent with the sociocognitive hypothesis, Spanos et al. (1985) demonstrated that normal college students can be induced by suggestion under hypnosis to exhibit some of the phenomena seen in DID, including the adoption of a second identity with a different name that shows a different profile on a personality inventory. Thus people can enact a second identity when situa- tional forces encourage it. Related situational forces that may affect the individual outside the therapist’s office include memories of one’s past behavior (e.g., as a child), observations of other people’s behavior (e.g., others being assertive and independent, or sexy and flirtatious), and media portrayals of DID (Lilienfeld et al., 1999; Piper & Merskey, 2004b; Spanos, 1994). Sociocognitive theory is also consistent with evidence that most DID patients do not show unambiguous signs of the disor- der before they enter therapy and with evidence that the number of alter identities often increases (sometimes dramatically) with time spent in therapy (Piper & Merskey, 2004b). It is also consis- tent with the increased prevalence of DID since the 1970s, when the first popular accounts of DID reached the general public, and since 1980, when therapist awareness of the condition increased as well (Lilienfeld et al., 1999; Piper & Merskey, 2004a). However, there are also many criticisms of sociocognitive theory. For example, Spanos and colleagues’ demonstration of role-playing in hypnotized college students is interesting, but it does not show that this is the way DID is actually caused in real life. For example, someone might be able to give a convinc- ing portrayal of a person with a broken leg, but this would not establish how legs are usually broken. Moreover, the hypnotized participants in this and other experiments showed only a few of the most obvious symptoms of DID (such as more than one identity) and showed them only under short-lived, contrived lab- oratory conditions. No studies have shown that other symptoms such as depersonalization, memory lapses for prolonged periods, or auditory hallucinations can occur under similar laboratory  Kenneth Bianchi, known as the “Hillside Strangler,” brutally raped and murdered 10 women in the Los Angeles area. Hoping to create a plea of “not guilty by reason of insanity,” Bianchi fabricated a second personality—“Steve”—who “emerged” while Kenneth was under hypnosis. A psychologist and psychiatrist specializing in DID determined he was faking the diagnosis, and Bianchi was subsequently convicted of the murders.
  conditions. Thus, although some of the   symptoms   of DID could be created by social enactment, there is no evidence that the   dis- order   can be created this way (e.g., Gleaves, 1996).  Are recovered Memories of Abuse in DiD real or False?   Case reports of the cruelty and torture that some DID patients suffered as children are gut-wrenching to read or hear. However, the accuracy and trustworthiness of these reports of widespread sexual and other forms of childhood abuse in DID have become a matter of major controversy. Critics (who are often proponents of sociocognitive theory) argue that many of these reports of DID patients, which generally come up in the course of therapy, may be the result of false memories, which are in turn a product of highly leading questions and suggestive techniques applied by well-meaning but inadequately skilled and careless psychotherapists (Lilienfeld et al., 1999; Loftus & Davis, 2006; Yapko, 1994). It seems quite clear to many investigators that this sort of thing has happened, often with tragic conse- quences. Innocent family members have been falsely accused by DID patients and have sometimes been convicted and impris- oned. But it is also true that brutal abuse of children occurs far too often and that it can have very adverse effects on devel- opment, perhaps encouraging pathological dissociation (e.g., Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007; Nash et al., 1993). In such cases, prosecution of the perpetrators of the abuse is indeed appropri- ate. Of course, the real difficulty here is in determining when the recovered memories of abuse are real and when they are false (or some combination of the two). This bitter controversy about the issue of false memory is more extensively considered in the Unresolved Issues section at the end of this chapter. One way to document that particular recovered memories are real might be if some reliable physiological test could be developed to distinguish between them. Thus, some research- ers are currently trying to determine whether there are different neural correlates of real and false memories that could be used to make this determination reliably. Another somewhat easier way to document whether a particular recovered memory is real would be to have independent verification that the abuse had actually occurred, such as through physician, hospital, and police records. A number of studies have indeed reported that they have confirmed the reported cases of abuse, but critics have shown that the criteria used for corroborating evidence are almost invari- ably very loose and suspect as to their validity. For example, Chu and colleagues (1999) simply asked their subjects, “Have you had anyone confirm these events?” (p. 751) but did not specify what constituted confirmation and had no way of determining if subjects were exaggerating or distorting the information they provided as confirming evidence (Loftus & Davis, 2006; Piper & Merskey, 2004a). In another example of a flawed study, Lewis and colleagues (1997) studied 12 convicted murderers and then confirmed through medical, social service, and prison records that all 12 had been severely abused as children. Unfortunately, this study did not include a control group of otherwise comparable murderers who did not exhibit DID symptoms. Hence we can- not be certain that the childhood abuse of these subjects is not as much (or more) associated with violence or conviction for murder as with the development of DID specifically. Moreover, Lewis and colleagues should have carefully assessed for the pos- sibility that some of the murderers might have been malingering (i.e., faking DID; Lilienfeld et al., 1999). Thus, although this study may have been one of the most impressive attempts yet to document abuse independently in people with DID, it was sig- nificantly flawed and therefore highly inconclusive.  if Abuse Has occurred, Does it play a Causal role in DiD?   Let us put the previous controversy about the reality of recovered memories of abuse aside for a moment and assume that severe abuse has occurred in the early childhood backgrounds of many people with DID. How can we determine whether this abuse has played a critical   causal role   in the development of DID (e.g., Piper & Merskey, 2004a)? Unfortunately, many difficulties arise in answering this question. For example, child abuse usually happens in family environments plagued by many other sources of adversity and trauma (e.g., various forms of psychopathology and extreme neglect and poverty). One or more of these other, corre- lated sources of adversity could actually be playing the causal role (e.g., Lilienfeld et al., 1999; Nash et al., 1993). Another difficulty of determining the role of abuse is that people who have experi- enced child abuse as well as symptoms of DID may be more likely to seek treatment than people with symptoms of DID who did not experience abuse. Thus the individuals in most studies on the prevalence of child abuse in DID may not be representative of the population of all people who suffer from DID. Finally, childhood abuse has been claimed by some to lead to many different forms of psychopathology including depression, PTSD, eating disorders, somatic symptom disorders, and borderline personality disorder, to name just a few. Perhaps the most we will ever be able to say is that childhood abuse may play a   nonspecific   role for many disor- ders, with other, more specific factors determining which disorder develops (see Chapters 10 and 12).  Comments on a Few of these Controversies About DiD   As we have seen, numerous studies indicate that the sepa- rate identities harbored by DID patients are somewhat physi-  Former Georgia football star Herschel Walker has written a book,   Break- ing Free: My Life with Dissociative Identity Disorder   (2008), in which he tells about his struggle with this disorder.
ologically and cognitively distinct. For example, EEG activity of various alters may be quite different. Because such differences cannot in any obvious way be simulated (e.g., Eich et al., 1997), it seems that DID must, in at least some cases, involve more than simply the social enactment of roles. Moreover, this should not be too surprising, given the widespread evidence of separate (dissociated) memory subsystems and nonconscious active mental processing, which indicates that much highly organized mental activity is normally carried on in all of us in the background, out- side of awareness (e.g., Kihlstrom, 2005). Moreover, some people seem to be especially prone to pathological variants of these disso- ciative processes (Waller et al., 1996; Waller & Ross, 1997). We should also note that each of these controversies has usually been stated in a dichotomous way: Is DID real or faked? What causes DID—spontaneous social enactment of roles or repeated childhood trauma? Are recovered memories of abuse real or false? If abuse occurs, does it play a primary causal role? Unfortunately, however, such dichotomously stated questions encourage oversimplified answers. The human mind does not seem to operate in these dichotomous ways, and we need to address the complex and multifaceted nature of the dissociated mental processes that these often miserable and severely stressed patients are experiencing. Fortunately, theorists on both sides have begun to soften their positions a little, acknowledging that multiple different causal pathways are likely to be involved. For example, Ross (1997, 1999), a long-time advocate for a strong version of posttraumatic theory, later acknowledged that some cases are faked and that some may be inadvertently caused by unskilled therapists in the course of treatment. In addition, other advocates of posttraumatic theory have recently acknowledged that both real and false memories do occur in these patients, noting that it is critical that a method for determining which is which be developed (e.g., Gleaves & Williams, 2005; Gleaves et al., 2004). From the other side, Lilienfeld et al., 1999, who have been vocal advocates for Spanos’ sociocognitive theory since his death in 1994, have acknowledged that some people with DID may have undergone real abuse, although they believe it occurs far less often, and is less likely to play a real causal role, than the trauma theorists maintain (see also Kihlstrom, 2005).  Sociocultural Factors in Dissociative Disorders  There seems little doubt that the prevalence of dissociative dis- orders, especially their more dramatic forms such as DID, is influenced by the degree to which such phenomena are accepted or tolerated either as normal or as legitimate mental disorders by the surrounding cultural context. Indeed, in our own society, the acceptance and tolerance of DID as a legitimate disorder have var- ied tremendously over time. Compared to relatively high reported rates of DID in Western cultures, a recent study of 893 patients diagnosed with some type of dissociative disorder over 10 years at a psychiatric hospital in India found no cases of DID (Chaturvedi et al., 2010). Nevertheless, although its prevalence varies, DID has now been identified in all racial groups, socioeconomic classes, and cultures where it has been studied. For example, outside North America it has been found in countries ranging from Nigeria and Ethiopia to Turkey, India, China, Australia, and the Caribbean, to name a few (Maldonado et al., 2002; Xiao et al., 2006). Many seemingly related phenomena, such as spirit pos- session and dissociative trances, occur very frequently in many different parts of the world where the local culture sanctions them (Krippner, 1994; Spiegel et al., 2011). When entered into voluntarily, trance and possession states are not consid- ered pathological and should not be construed as mental dis- orders. But some people who enter into these states voluntarily because of cultural norms develop distress and impairment. In  DSM-5 , the diagnostic criteria for DID have been modified to that they now include certain phenomena associated with possession. A   trance   is said to occur when someone experiences a temporary marked alteration in state of consciousness or identity (but with no replacement by an alternative identity). It is usually associated with either a narrowing of awareness of the immediate surroundings, or stereotyped behaviors or movements that are experienced as beyond one’s control. A  possession trance   is similar except that the alteration of con- sciousness or identity is replaced by a new identity that is attributed to the influence of a spirit, deity, or other power. In both cases there is typically amnesia for the trance state. One study of 58 individuals from Singapore with this diagnosis, as well as 58 individuals with a diagnosis of major depres- sion, found that conflicts over religious or cultural issues, prior exposure to trance states, and being a spiritual healer or healer’s helper were most predictive of who had dissocia- tive trance disorder relative to major depression (Ng & Chan, 2004). A recent review of 402 cases of dissociative trance and possession disorders indicates that migration and struggles with acculturation are associated with these disorders (During et al., 2011). There are also cross-cultural variants on dissociative disor- ders, such as   Amok , which is often thought of as a rage disorder. Amok occurs when a dissociative episode leads to violent, aggres- sive, or homicidal behavior directed at other people and objects. It occurs mostly in men and is often precipitated by a perceived slight or insult. The person often has ideas of persecution, anger, and amnesia, often followed by a period of exhaustion and depression. Amok is found in places such as Malaysia, Laos, the Philippines, Papua New Guinea, and Puerto Rico and among Navajo Indians.  treatment and outcomes in Dissociative Disorders  Unfortunately, virtually no systematic, controlled research has been conducted on treatment of depersonalization disorder, dissociative amnesia, and dissociative fugue, and so very little is known about how to treat them successfully. Numerous case histories, sometimes presented in small sets of cases, are available, but without control groups who are assessed at the same time or
  who receive nonspecific treatments it is impossible to know the effectiveness of the varied treatments that have been attempted (Kihlstrom, 2005). As noted earlier depersonalization/derealization disorder is generally thought to be resistant to treatment (e.g., Simeon et al., 1997), although treatment may be useful for associated psycho- pathology such as anxiety and depressive disorders. Some think that hypnosis, including training in self-hypnosis techniques, may be useful because patients with depersonalization disorder can learn to dissociate and then “reassociate,” thereby gaining some sense of control over their depersonalization and derealization experiences (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007; Maldonado et al., 2002). Many types of antidepressant, antianxiety, and antipsychotic drugs have also been tried and sometimes have modest effects. However, one randomized controlled study showed no difference between treatment with Prozac versus with placebo (Simeon et al., 2004). One recent treatment showing some promise for the treatment of dissociative disorders involves administering rTMS (repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation) to the temporo-parietal junc- tion, an area of the brain highly involved in the experience of a unified self and body (Mantovani et al., 2011). After three weeks of treatment, half of the subjects showed significant reductions in depersonalization, with nonresponders showing symptom reduction after an additional three weeks of treatment. In dis- sociative amnesia and fugue, it is important for the person to be in a safe environment, and simply removing her or him from what he or she perceives as a threatening situation sometimes allows for spontaneous recovery of memory. Hypnosis, as well as drugs such as benzodiazepines, barbiturates, sodium pentobar- bital, and sodium amobarbital, is often used to facilitate recall of repressed and dissociated memories (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007; Maldonado et al., 2002). After memories are recalled, it is important for the patient to work through the memories with the therapist so that the experiences can be reframed in new ways. However, unless the memories can be independently cor- roborated, they should not be taken at their face value (Kihlstrom, 2005). For DID patients, most current therapeutic approaches are based on the assumption of posttraumatic theory that the disor- der was caused by abuse (Kihlstrom, 2005). Most therapists set integration of the previously separate alters, together with their collective merging into the host personality, as the ultimate goal of treatment (e.g., Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007). There is often considerable resistance to this process by the DID patients, who often consider dissociation as a protective device (e.g., “I knew my father could get some of me, but he couldn’t get all of me”; Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007, p. 781). If successful integration occurs, the patient eventually develops a unified personality, although it is not uncommon for only partial integration to be achieved. But it is also very important to assess whether improve- ment in other symptoms of DID and associated disorders has occurred. Indeed, it seems that treatment is more likely to pro- duce symptom improvement, as well as associated improvements in functioning, than to achieve full and stable integration of the different alter identities (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007; Maldo- nado et al., 2002). Typically the treatment for DID is psychodynamic and insight-oriented, focused on uncovering and working through the trauma and other conflicts that are thought to have led to the disorder (Kihlstrom, 2005). One of the primary tech- niques used in most treatments of DID is hypnosis (e.g., Kluft, 1993; Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007; Maldonado et al., 2002). Most DID patients are hypnotizable and when hypno- tized are often able to recover past unconscious and frequently traumatic memories, often from childhood. Then these mem- ories can be processed, and the patient can become aware that the dangers once present are no longer there. (One problem here is that such patients are suggestible under hypnosis, so much of what is recalled may not be accurate; see Kihlstrom, 2005; Loftus & Davis, 2006). Through the use of hypnosis, therapists are often able to make contact with different identi- ties and reestablish connections between distinct, seemingly separate identity states. An important goal is to integrate the personalities into one identity that is better able to cope with current stressors. Clearly, successful negotiation of this critical phase of treatment requires therapeutic skills of the highest order; that is, the therapist must be strongly committed as well as professionally competent. Regrettably, not all therapists are. Most reports in the literature are treatment summaries of single cases, and reports of successful cases should always be considered with caution, especially given the large bias in favor of publishing positive rather than negative results. Treatment outcome data for large groups of DID patients have been reported in only four studies we are aware of, and none of these included a control group, although it is clear that DID does not spontaneously remit simply with the passage of time, nor if a therapist chooses to ignore DID-related issues (Kluft, 1999; Maldonado et al., 2002). For example, Ellason and Ross (1997) reported on a 2-year postdischarge follow-up of DID patients originally treated in a specialized inpatient unit. Of the original 135 such patients, 54 were located and systemati- cally assessed. All these patients, and especially those who had achieved full integration, generally showed marked improve- ments in various aspects of their lives. However, only 12 of the 54 had achieved full integration of their identities. Such results are promising, but we must wonder about the clini- cal status of the 81 “lost” patients who may likely have done less well. Another 10-year follow-up study reported similar results in a smaller sample of 25 treated DID patients. Only 12 were located 10 years later; of these, six had achieved full integration, but two of those had partially relapsed (Coons & Bowman, 2001). In general it has been found that (1) for treatment to be successful, it must be prolonged, often lasting many years, and (2) the more severe the case, the longer that treatment is needed (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007; Maldonado et al., 2002).
in review  •   Describe the symptoms known as depersonalization and dereal- ization, and indicate which disorder is primarily characterized by their appearance.  •   Describe dissociative amnesia and dissociative fugue, and indi- cate what aspects of memory are affected.  •   What are the primary symptoms of dissociative identity disorder (DID), and why is its prevalence thought to have increased?  •   Review the four major controversies surrounding DID that were discussed in this chapter.  UnReSOLveD issues  DID and the Reality of “Recovered Memories”  A s we have seen in this chapter, many controversies sur- round the nature and origins of DID. None have been more bitter than those related to the truth value of “recovered” memories of childhood abuse, particularly sexual abuse, which posttraumatic theorists assert is the major causal factor in the development of DID. Indeed, a virtual chasm has developed between the “believers” (mostly but not exclusively private practitioners who treat people with DID) and the “dis- believers” (mostly but not exclusively the more academic and science-oriented mental health professionals). The disbelievers are very sympathetic to people suffering DID symptoms, but they have tended to doubt that the disorder is usually caused by childhood abuse and have challenged the validity or accuracy of recovered memories of abuse (see Loftus & Davis, 2006, for a review of the recovered memory debate). For 20 years, these controversies have moved beyond profes- sional debate and have become major public issues, leading to countless legal proceedings. DID patients who recover memories of abuse (often in therapy) have often sued their parents for hav- ing inflicted abuse. But ironically, therapists and institutions have also been sued for implanting memories of abuse that they later came to believe had not actually occurred. Some parents, as- serting they had been falsely accused, formed an international support organization—the False Memory Syndrome Foundation— and have sometimes sued therapists for damages, alleging that the therapists induced false memories of parental abuse in their child. Many families have been torn apart in the fallout from this remarkable climate of suspicion, accusation, litigation, and unre- lenting hostility. Whether DID originates in childhood abuse and whether recov- ered memories of abuse are accurate are basically separate is- sues, but they have tended to become fused in the course of the debate. Hence those who doubt the validity of memories of abuse are also likely to regard the phenomenon of DID as stemming from the social enactment of roles encouraged or induced—like the memories of abuse themselves—by misguided therapy (e.g., see Bjorklund, 2000; Lilienfeld et al., 1999; Lynn et al., 2004; Piper & Merskey, 2004a, 2004b). Believers, on the other hand, have usually taken both DID and the idea that abuse is its cause to be established beyond doubt (e.g., see Gleaves, 1996; Gleaves et al., 2001; Ross, 1997, 1999). Much of the controversy about the validity of recovered memo- ries is rooted in disagreements about the nature, reliability, and malleability of human autobiographical memory. With some exceptions, evidence for childhood abuse as a cause of DID is restricted to the “recovered memories” (memories not originally accessible) of adults being treated for dissociative experiences. Believers argue that before treatment such memories had been “repressed” because of their traumatic nature or had been available only to certain alter identities that the host identity was generally not aware of. Treatment, according to this view of believers, dismantles the repressive defense and thus makes available to awareness an essentially accurate memory recording of the past abuse. Disbelievers counter with several scientifically well-supported arguments. For example, scientific evidence in support of the repression concept is quite weak (e.g., Kihlstrom, 2005; Loftus & Davis, 2006; Piper, 1998). In many alleged cases of repression, the event may have been lost to memory in the course of ordi- nary forgetting rather than repression, or it may have occurred in the first 3 to 4 years of life, before memories can be recorded for retrieval in adulthood. In many other cases, evidence for re- pression has been claimed in studies where people may simply have failed to report a previously remembered event, often be- cause they were never asked or were reluctant to disclose such very personal information (Kihlstrom, 2005; Loftus & Davis, 2006; Pope et al., 1998). Even if memories can be repressed, there are very serious ques- tions about the accuracy of recovered memories. Human mem- ory of past events does not operate in a computer-like manner, retrieving with perfect accuracy an unadulterated record of in- formation previously stored and then repressed. Rather, human memory is malleable, constructive, and very much subject to modification on the basis of events happening after any original memory trace is established (Loftus & Bernstein, 2005; Loftus & Davis, 2006; Schacter et al., 2000). Indeed, there is now good evidence that in certain circum- stances, people are sometimes very prone to the development of false memories (see Wade et al., 2007, for a review). For ex- ample, a number of studies have now shown that when normal adult subjects are asked to imagine repeatedly events that they
  8.1   What are somatic symptom disorders?  •   Somatic symptom disorders lie at the interface of abnormal psy -  chology and medicine. These are disorders in which psychologi -  cal problems are manifested in physical symptoms. In response to the symptoms the person also experiences abnormal thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. •   Somatic symptom disorder occurs in individuals who have had multiple somatic complaints lasting at least 6 months. Even if the symptoms do not seem to have a medical explanation, the person’s suffering is regarded as authentic.  8.2   What is illness anxiety disorder?  •   Illness anxiety occurs in individuals who are very anxious about having an illness even though there are no apparent symptoms.  8.3   What is conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder)?  •   Conversion disorder involves patterns of symptoms or deficits affecting sensory or voluntary motor functions leading one to think there is a medical or neurological condition, even though medical examination reveals no physical basis for the symptoms.  8.4   What is the difference between a factitious disorder and malingering?  •   Individuals with factitious disorder intentionally produce medi -  cal or psychological symptoms (or both). They do this in the absence of external rewards in order to take on an illness role. •   Malingering involves the intentional production of symptoms or the exaggeration of symptoms. This is motivated by external factors such as a wish to claim insurance money, avoid work or military service, or to get leniency in a criminal prosecution.  8.5   What are the primary features of dissociative disorders?  •   Dissociative disorders occur when the processes that normally regulate awareness and the multichannel capacities of the mind apparently become disorganized, leading to various anomalies of consciousness and personal identity.  are quite sure had not happened to them before age 10, they later increase their estimate of the likelihood that these events actually had happened to them (Tsai et al., 2000). Moreover, even in a relatively short time frame, adult subjects sometimes come to believe they have performed somewhat bizarre acts (e.g., kissing a magnifying glass), as well as common acts (e.g., flipping a coin), after simply having imagined they had engaged in these acts several times 2 weeks earlier (Thomas & Loftus, 2002). These and other studies clearly show that repeated imag- ining of certain events (even somewhat bizarre events) can lead people to have false memories of events that never happened (Loftus & Bernstein, 2005; Loftus & Davis, 2006). In addition, an experimental study by McNally and colleagues (2005) looked at individuals who reported either repressed or recovered memories of childhood sexual abuse and found some evidence that they had greater difficulty on at least some measures than normal controls in distinguishing between words that they had seen versus words that they had only imagined. This suggests that people with repressed or recovered memories of abuse may have greater difficulty distinguishing between what has actually happened to them and what they have imagined hap- pened to them. However, a different study found that those who report recovered memories of childhood sexual abuse did not show increased difficulty retrieving non-abuse-related autobio- graphic memories compared to those who reported continuous memories of childhood sexual abuse or a control group report- ing no childhood sexual abuse (Raymaekers et al., 2010). One fascinating study compared a group of people who had continuous memories of childhood abuse with two groups who had recovered memories of abuse. In one of the latter groups the memories had been recovered during therapy and in the other the memories had been recovered out of therapy. The researchers then attempted to corroborate these recovered memories, and found corroborative evidence for over half of those who had recovered memories outside of therapy and for none in the group who recovered their memories during therapy (Geraerts et al., 2007). Recently, McNally and Geraerts (2009) offered a different per- spective on recovered memories, one that attempts to bridge the gap between the conviction that repression underlies re- covered memories and the alternate conviction that all recov- ered memories are false. Their third perspective suggests that some recovered memories are genuine but were never actually repressed. Instead, some abuse victims may simply not have thought about their abuse for a long period of time, have been deliberately attempting to forget the abuse (suppression rather than repression), or may have forgotten prior instances when they did recall the abuse, resulting in the false impression that a recently surfaced memory had been repressed for years.  summary  8
alter identities   281  conversion disorder   270  depersonalization   276  depersonalization/derealization disorder   276  derealization   276  dissociation   276  dissociative amnesia   278  dissociative disorders   276  dissociative fugue   278  dissociative identity disorder (DiD)   280  factitious disorder   264  factitious disorder imposed on another   275  host identity   281  hypochondriasis   265  hysteria   271  implicit memory   276  implicit perception   276  malingering   264  pain disorder   269  posttraumatic theory (of DiD)   285  primary gain   271  secondary gain   271  sociocognitive theory (of DiD)   286  soma   264  somatic symptom disorders   264  somatization disorder   268  somatoform disorders   264  key terms 8.6   What is depersonalization/derealization disorder?  •   Depersonalization/derealization disorder occurs in people who experience persistent and recurrent episodes of derealization (los- ing one’s sense of reality of the outside world) and/or deperson- alization (losing one’s sense of oneself and one’s own reality).  8.7   What is dissociative amnesia?  •   Dissociative amnesia involves an inability to recall previously stored information that cannot be accounted for by ordinary forgetting and seems to be a common initial reaction to highly stressful circumstances. The memory loss is primarily for episodic or autobiographical memory.  8.8   What is dissociative identity disorder?  •   In dissociative identity disorder, the person manifests at least two or more distinct identities that alternate in some way in taking control of behavior. Alter identities may differ in many ways from the host identity.
  learning objectives  9.1  What are the clinical aspects of eating disorders?  9.2  What are the risk and causal factors for eating disorders?  9.3  How are eating disorders treated?  9.4  How do we define obesity and why is it a worldwide problem?  9.5  Who is most at risk for obesity  9.6  How is obesity treated?  Weighing a mere 88 pounds on her 5-foot-8 frame, Brazilian model Ana Carolina Reston succumbed to a generalized infection on November 15, 2006, while battling anorexia nervosa. She was 21 years old. Having modeled for Armani and Versace and in numerous countries around the world, Carolina was initially hospitalized for kid- ney failure. Ana Carolina’s anorexia nervosa apparently began after she was criticized for being “too fat” during a casting call in China. At the height of her illness her diet consisted only of tomatoes and apples. Her death highlights the health risks associated with eating disorders. This model’s struggles with anorexia nervosa also reveal the extent to which ide- als of beauty are intertwined with thinness. Looking good often means being slim, especially for those in the public eye. Not surprisingly, many celebrities, including Nicole Richie, Mary-Kate Olsen, Victoria Beckham, and the late Princess Diana, have also struggled with eating disorders. After the death in 2006 of Luisel Ramos, a model from Uruguay, some steps were taken by the fashion industry to try to address the situation. The organizers of the Madrid Fashion Week decided to ban models who did not have a body mass index (a measure of a person’s weight relative to height) in the healthy range. In 2010, Victoria Beckham reportedly deemed 23 models “too skinny” and refused to have them be part of her New York Fashion Week runway show. And in France, legislation has been proposed to prohibit media that encour- age emaciation, or extreme thinness. What do you think? Should models be required to get a certificate of health from their doctors before being allowed on the catwalks? Should we expect the fashion industry to police itself, or should leg- islation be involved? Are you ready to see healthier-looking models in the pages of   Vogue , or does ultrathin still mean ultrafashionable to you? According to the   DSM-5   (APA, 2013),   eating disorders  are characterized by a persistent disturbance in eating behav- ior. No doubt you have heard about anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Within the   DSM   these are considered to be separate syndromes, and they reflect two types of adult eat- ing disorders. However, disordered eating is not their only striking feature. At the heart of both disorders is an intense fear of becoming overweight and fat and an accompanying pursuit of thinness. This pursuit is relentless and sometimes deadly. In this chapter we focus on both of these disorders. We also examine obesity. Obesity is not considered to be an eating disorder or a psychiatric condition in the   DSM ; however, its prevalence is rising at an alarming rate. Obesity also accounts for more morbidity and mortality than all other eating disorders combined. Because obesity clearly involves disordered eating pat- terns, we discuss it in detail in this chapter.  Model Ana Carolina Reston weighed just 88 pounds when she died from medical complications of anorexia nervosa.  The late Princess Diana’s courage in discussing her own struggles with bulimia nervosa helped many other individuals with the same problem to seek treatment.  9
  Clinical Aspects of Eating Disorders  Anorexia Nervosa  The term   anorexia nervosa   literally means “lack of appetite induced by nervousness.” This definition is something of a misnomer, however, as a lack of appetite is neither the core difficulty nor necessarily even true. At the heart of   anorexia nervosa   is an intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat, combined with behaviors that result in a significantly low body weight. The   DSM-5   criteria for anorexia nervosa are shown in the   DSM   criteria box. An important change from  DSM-IV   to   DSM-5   is that in   DSM-5   amenorrhea (cessation of menstruation) is no longer required for a person to be given the diagnosis. Studies have suggested that women who con- tinue to menstruate but meet all the other diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa are very similar psychologically to women who have amenorrhea and have ceased menstruating (Attia & Roberto, 2009). Amenorrhea is also not a criterion that can be used for males, nor can it be assessed in prepubescent girls or in women who use hormonal contraceptives.  Watch   the   Video   Natasha: Anorexia   on  MyPsychLab  Although we may think of anorexia nervosa as a modern problem, it is centuries old. Descriptions of extreme fasting that were probably signs of anorexia nervosa can be found in early religious literature (Vandereycken, 2002). The first known medical account of anorexia nervosa, however, was published in 1689 by Richard Morton (see Silverman, 1997, for a good general historical overview). Morton described two patients, an 18-year-old girl and a 16-year-old boy, who suffered from a “nervous consumption” that resulted in wasting of body tis- sue. The female patient eventually died because she refused treatment. The disorder did not receive its current name until 1873, when Charles Lasègue in Paris and Sir William Gull in London independently described the clinical syndrome. In his last publi- cation on the condition, Gull (1888) described a 14-year-old girl who began “without apparent cause, to evince a repugnance to food; and soon afterwards declined to take any whatever, except half a cup of tea or coffee.” After being prescribed to eat light food every few hours, the patient made a good recovery. Gull’s illustrations of the patient before and after treatment appear in Figure 9.1. Even though they may look painfully thin or even emaci- ated, many patients with anorexia nervosa deny having any problem. Indeed, they may come to feel fulfilled by their weight loss. Despite this quiet satisfaction, however, they may feel ambivalent about their weight. Efforts may be made to conceal their thinness by wearing baggy clothes or carrying hidden bulky objects so that they will weigh more when mea- sured by others. Patients with anorexia nervosa may even resort to drinking large amounts of water to increase their weight temporarily. There are two types of anorexia nervosa: the restricting type and the binge-eating/purging type. The central difference  (B) (A)  figure   9.1  Gull’s patient with anorexia nervosa. (A) Before treatment. (B) After treatment. Source: Gull, W. (1888). Anorexia nervosa.   Lancet , pp. i, 516–17.  A.   Restriction of energy intake relative to requirements, lead- ing to a significantly low body weight in the context of age, sex, developmental trajectory, and physical health.  Significantly low weight   is defined as a weight that is less than minimally normal or, for children and adolescents, less than that minimally expected.  B.   Intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or persistent behavior that interferes with weight gain, even though at a significantly low weight.  C.   Disturbance in the way in which one’s body weight or shape is experienced, undue influence of body weight or shape on self-evaluation, or persistent lack of recognition of the seriousness of the current low body weight.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Anorexia Nervosa   DSM- 5
  between these two subtypes concerns the way in which patients maintain their very low weight. In the restricting type, every effort is made to limit the quantity of food consumed. Caloric intake is tightly controlled. Patients often try to avoid eating in the presence of other people. When they are at the table, they may eat excessively slowly, cut their food into very small pieces, or dispose of food secretly (Beaumont, 2002). The relentless restriction of food intake is not possible for all patients with anorexia nervosa. Patients with the binge-eating/ purging type of anorexia nervosa differ from patients with restricting anorexia nervosa because they either binge, purge, or binge and purge. A   binge   involves an out-of-control consump- tion of an amount of food that is far greater than what most people would eat in the same amount of time and under the same circumstances. These binges may be followed by efforts to  purge , or remove from their bodies, the food they have eaten. Methods of purging commonly include self-induced vomiting or misusing laxatives, diuretics, and enemas. Other compensa- tory behaviors that do not involve purging are excessive exercise or fasting. Even purging strategies, however, do not prevent the absorption of all calories from food. Indicative of the distorted values of eating-disordered patients, (see Table 9.1 for personal comments that provide examples of this) those with the restricting type of anorexia ner- vosa are often greatly admired by others with eating disorders. One patient reported that she had not been “successful” in her anorexia nervosa because of her failure to reach an extremely low weight. Her belief was that the hallmark of a truly successful person with anorexia nervosa was death from starvation, and that patients who were able to accomplish this should somehow be revered (see Bulik & Kendler, 2000). In the example that follows, we describe the case of Tim, who is suffering from the restricting type of anorexia nervosa. Tim’s case reminds us that eating disorders can occur in young chil- dren as well as in boys. It further highlights the high comorbidity between eating disorders and obsessive-compulsive symptoms and personality traits, which we will subsequently discuss. In fact, Tim warrants an additional diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder.  Tim: Obsessed With His Weight   Tim is 8 years old. He is extremely concerned about his weight and weighs him- self daily. Tim complains that he is too fat, and if he does not lose weight, he cuts back on food. He has lost 10 pounds in the past year and still feels that he is too fat. However, it is clear that he is underweight. In desperation, his parents have removed the scales from the house; as a result, Tim is keeping a record of the calories that he eats daily. He spends an excessive amount of time on these calculations, checking and rechecking that he has done it just right. In addition, Tim is described as being obsessed with clean- liness and neatness. Currently, he has no friends because he refuses to visit them, feeling that their houses are “dirty.” He becomes upset when another child touches him. He is always checking whether he is doing things the way they “should” be done. He often feels very agitated and anxious about this. Each day, he has to wake up at least 2 hours before leaving for school in order to allow himself sufficient time to get ready. Recently, he woke up at 1:30   a.m . to prepare for school. Source: Adapted with permission from   R. L. Spitzer (2000) . DSM-IV-TR Casebook: A Learning Companion to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision . Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.  Because the artistic standards of their profession emphasize a slender physique, ballet dancers are at an especially high risk for eating disorders (see the case study of Ms. R. on p. 297). Gelsey Kirkland, who developed an eating disorder while she was a premier ballerina with the New York City Ballet, described the existence of a “concentration camp aesthetic” within the company. This was no doubt fostered by the famous choreographer George Balanchine, who, as described by Kirk- land in her autobiography, tapped her on the ribs and sternum after one event and exhorted that he “must see the bones” (Kirkland, 1986, pp. 55–56).  Patients with anorexia nervosa may be emaciated while still denying that they have any problems with their weight. They will go to great lengths to conceal their thinness by wearing baggy clothes, or by drink- ing massive amounts of water prior to being weighed (in a hospital set- ting, for instance).  table   9.1  Distorted Thinking in Anorexia Nervosa  “I have a rule when I weigh myself. If I’ve gained then I starve the rest of the day. But if I’ve lost, then I starve too.” “Bones define who we really are, let them show.” “An imperfect body reflects an imperfect person.” “Anorexia is not a self-inflicted disease, it’s a self-controlled lifestyle.” “It’s not deprivation, it’s liberation.”
 Ms. R.: Going to Extremes   Ms. R. is a very thin, 19-year-old, single ballet student who comes in at the insistence of her parents for a consultation concerning her eating behavior. Ms. R. has had a lifelong interest in ballet. She began to attend classes at age 5 and by age 8 was recognized by her teachers as having impressive talent. Since the age of 14 she has been a member of a national ballet company. Ms. R. has had difficulties with eating since age 15 when, for reasons she is unable to explain, she began to induce vomiting after what she felt was overeating. The vomiting was preceded by many years of persistent dieting, which began with the encouragement of her ballet teacher. Over the past 3 years, Ms. R.’s binges have occurred once a day in the evening and have been routinely followed by self-induced vomiting. The binges consist of dozens of rice cakes or, more rarely, half a gallon of ice cream. Ms. R. consumes this food late at night after her parents have gone to bed. For some time, Ms. R.’s parents have been concerned that their daughter has a problem with her eating, but she consistently denied difficulties until about a month before this consultation. Ms. R. reached her full height of 5 feet 8 inches at age 15. Her greatest weight was 120 pounds at age 16, which she describes as being fat. For the past 3 years, her weight has been reasonably stable in the range of 100 to 104 pounds. She exercises regularly as part of her profession, and she denies using laxatives, diuret- ics, or diet pills as a means of weight control. Except when she is binge eating, she avoids the consumption of foods high in fat or sugar. Since age 15, she has been a strict vegetarian and consumes no meat or eggs and little cheese. For the past 3 or 4 years, Ms. R. has been uncomfortable eating in front of other people and goes to great lengths to avoid such situations. This places great limitations on her social life. Source: Adapted with permission from   DSM-IV Case Studies: A Clinical Guide to Differential Diagnosis , Copyright 1996. American Psychiatric Association.  Bulimia Nervosa  Bulimia nervosa   is characterized by uncontrollable binge eating and efforts to prevent resulting weight gain by using inappropriate behaviors such as self-induced vomiting and excessive exercise. Bulimia nervosa was recognized as a psychiatric syndrome relatively recently. The British psychia- trist G. F. M. Russell (1997) proposed the term in 1979, and it was adopted into the   DSM   in 1987. The word bulimia comes from the Greek   bous   (which means “ox”), and   limos   (“hunger”). It is meant to denote a hunger of such proportions that the person “could eat an ox.” The   DSM-5   criteria for bulimia nervosa are shown in the  DSM   box below. Compared to   DSM-IV , the diagnostic criteria for bulimia nervosa have been relaxed. Binge eating and purg- ing now have to occur on average once a week (instead of twice a week) over a 3-month period. This change was made after research showed that people with sub-threshold bulimia nervosa were remarkably similar to those who had the full syndrome (Eddy, Doyle, et al., 2008; Fairburn et al., 2007).  Ballet dancers are at very high risk for developing eating disorders. According to Gelsey Kirkland, once the premier ballerina at the New York City Ballet, the value placed on being thin can create a “concentration camp aesthetic” supported and encouraged by the dance company.  A.   Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge eating is characterized by both of the following:  1.   Eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any 2-hour period), an amount of food that is definitely larger than what most individuals would eat in a similar period of time under similar circumstances.  2.   A sense of lack of control over eating during the epi- sode (e.g., a feeling that one cannot stop eating or control what or how much one is eating).  B.   Recurrent inappropriate compensatory behaviors in order to prevent weight gain, such as self-induced vomiting; misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or other medications; fasting; or excessive exercise.  C.   The binge eating and inappropriate compensatory behav- iors both occur, on average, at least once a week for 3 months.  D.   Self-evaluation is unduly influenced by body shape and weight.  E.   The disturbance does not occur exclusively during episodes of anorexia nervosa.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Bulimia Nervosa   DSM- 5
  The clinical picture of the binge-eating/purging type of anorexia nervosa has much in common with bulimia nervosa. Indeed, some researchers have argued that the bulimic type of anorexia nervosa should really be considered another form of bulimia nervosa. The difference between a person with buli- mia nervosa and a person with the binge-eating/purging type of anorexia nervosa is weight. By definition, the person with anorexia nervosa is severely underweight. This is not true of the person with bulimia nervosa. Consequently, if the person who binges or purges also meets criteria for anorexia nervosa, the diagnosis is anorexia nervosa (binge-eating/purging type) and not bulimia nervosa. In other words, the anorexia nervosa diagnosis “trumps” the bulimia nervosa diagnosis. This is because there is a far greater mortality rate associated with anorexia nervosa than with bulimia nervosa. Recognizing this, the   DSM   requires that the more severe form of eating pathology take precedence diagnostically. People with anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa share a common fear of being or becoming fat. However, unlike patients with anorexia nervosa, those with bulimia nervosa are typically of normal weight or sometimes even slightly overweight. The fear of becoming fat helps explain the development of bulimia ner- vosa. Bulimia typically begins with restricted eating motivated by the desire to be slender. During these early stages, the person diets and eats low-calorie foods. Over time, however, the early resolve to restrict gradually erodes, and the person starts to eat “forbidden foods” such as potato chips, pizza, cake, ice cream, and chocolate. Of course, some patients binge on whatever food is available, including such things as raw cookie dough. During an average binge, someone with bulimia nervosa may consume as many as 4,800 calories (Johnson et al., 1982). After the binge, in an effort to manage the breakdown of self-control, the person begins to vomit, fast, exercise excessively, or abuse laxatives. This pattern then persists because, even though those with bulimia nervosa are disgusted by their behavior, the purging alleviates the fear of gaining weight that comes from eating. Whereas people with anorexia nervosa often deny the seri- ousness of their disorder and are surprised by the shock and con- cern with which others view their emaciated conditions, those with bulimia nervosa are often preoccupied with shame, guilt, and self-deprecation. They make efforts to conceal their behavior as they struggle (often unsuccessfully) to master their urges to binge. The case described below depicts a typical pattern.  Catherine: Distressed by Her Weight   Catherine is 20 years old. Catherine has been concerned about her weight and shape for several years. As a teenager she felt plump and was frequently on a diet, even though she was within the normal weight range for her age and height. As she became older, these concerns became more serious. She severely restricted her food intake and started punishing exercise regimens. At one stage she became significantly underweight. Medical help led to weight gain, which was quickly followed by more dieting and, for the first time, she started binge eating. Distressed by the increase in her weight and by increasingly frequent binge eating, Catherine began vomiting in a desperate attempt to lose weight. Over the last six months Catherine has skipped breakfast and lunch, eaten a normal evening meal with her family, but gone on to binge eat in the late evening usually two or three times a week. She binges in response to feeling upset and worried. In a recent typical binge she ate four slices of toast with butter and jam, six packets of potato chips, three large bars of chocolate, half a box of cereal and a large bowl of ice cream. She had been feeling rejected by a friend. Catherine drinks large quantities of water to help her induce vomiting after bingeing. More recently she has started to take 30 to 40 laxatives, as well as vomiting. She has a strenuous exercise regime, including 500 daily sit-ups and an aero- bic workout. Food is divided rigidly into good and bad categories; food in the bad category (such as cookies, chocolate, and cheese) is not allowed. Catherine has become increasingly self-conscious. She refuses to weigh herself, has given up swimming (she used to swim on her school team) and if she goes shopping she will not try on clothes unless she has privacy. Catherine dislikes her body. She is preoccupied with her shape and reports that a little voice in her head constantly says, “You’re fat and ugly, I can’t stand the way you look.” Catherine worries that her friends will think less of her if she does not lose weight (when out with friends she avoids eating and sucks her tummy in to the point of pain in order to appear thinner). She feels very bad about herself if she thinks she has gained weight. Source: Adapted from Cooper, Todd, & Wells, (2000). Bulimia Nervosa: A Cognitive Therapy Programme. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.  Binge Eating Disorder  A new addition to   DSM-5   is the diagnosis of   binge eating disorder (BED) . Previously, in   DSM-IV , binge eating was given provisional status. This encouraged researchers to study it. Research has now supported the idea that BED is a distinct clinical syndrome (Wonderlich et al., 2009). It has therefore entered the   DSM   as a new formal diagnosis.   Watch   the  Video   Stacy: Binge Eating Disorder   on   MyPsychLab  Although BED has some clinical features in common with bulimia nervosa, there is an important difference. After a binge (which may be at a level comparable to that of a patient with bulimia nervosa), the person with BED does not engage in any form of inappropriate “compensatory” behavior. This might include purging, using laxatives, or even exercising to limit weight gain (Table 9.2 summarizes the similarities and differences between different types of eating disorders). There is also much less dietary restraint in BED than is typical of either bulimia nervosa or anorexia nervosa (Wilfley et al., 2000). Not surprisingly, binge-eating disorder is associated with being over- weight or even obese (Hudson et al., 2007; Pike et al., 2001),
  although weight is not a factor involved in making the diagnosis. Interestingly, individuals with binge-eating disorder are more likely to have overvalued ideas about the importance of weight and shape than overweight or obese patients who do not have binge-eating disorder. In this respect, they also resemble people with bulimia nervosa (Allison et al., 2005).  Ms. A.: Feeling Out of Control   Ms. A. was a 38-year-old African American woman who was single, lived alone, and was employed as a personnel manager at a hotel in New York. Her height was 6 feet, and she weighed 292 pounds (BMI = 39.6; see Table 9.4 on p. 310) when she was initially seen at the eating disorders clinic. Her chief reason for going to the clinic was that she felt her eating was out of control and, as a result, she had gained approximately 80 pounds over the previous year. Ms. A. reported a lifetime history of obesity and a history of binge eating beginning at approximately age 11. At her intake session, she described her eating. She felt out of control and ate large amounts of food nearly every day, typically in the evenings when she was on her way home from work or alone at home. She tended to feel out of control throughout the day, which con- tributed to her daily snacking on three or four regular candy bars or three or four medium cookies and one ice cream bar. Ms. A. would consequently feel that a binge episode was inevitable. A typical binge episode consisted of two pieces of chicken, one small bowl of salad, two servings of mashed potatoes, one hamburger, one large serving of french fries, one fast-food serving of apple pie, one large chocolate shake, one large bag of potato chips, and 15 to 20 small cookies—all within a 2-hour period. During her binge episodes, Ms. A. ate much more rapidly than usual until she felt uncomfortably full, ate large amounts of food when she didn’t feel physically hun- gry, ate alone because she was embarrassed by the quantity  table   9.2  Comparing Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia Nervosa, and Binge Eating Disorder Symptom   Anorexia Nervosa   Bulimia Nervosa Binge Eating Disorder  Restricting   Binge/Purge   Purging   Nonpurging  Body weight   Markedly low   Markedly low   Normal weight or slightly overweight Normal weight or slightly overweight Typically overweight or obese  Fear of weight gain, becoming fat  yes   yes   yes   yes   no  Body image   Distorted perception   Distorted perception   Overconcerned with weight Overconcerned with weight May be unhappy with body and weight  Binge eating   no   yes   yes   yes   yes  Purging   no   yes   yes   no   no  Use of nonpurging methods to avoid weight gain  yes   yes   yes   yes   no  Feeling of lack of control over eating  no   During binges   yes   yes   yes  A.   Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge eating is characterized by both of the following:  1.   Eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any 2-hour period), an amount of food that is definitely larger than what most people would eat in a similar period of time under similar circumstances.  2.   A sense of lack of control over eating during the epi- sode (e.g., a feeling that one cannot stop eating or control what or how much one is eating).  B.   The binge-eating episodes are associated with three (or more) of the following:  1.   Eating much more rapidly than normal.  2.   Eating until feeling uncomfortably full.  3.   Eating large amounts of food when not feeling physically hungry.  4.   Eating alone because of feeling embarrassed by how much one is eating.  5.   Feeling disgusted with oneself, depressed, or very guilty afterward.  C.   Marked distress regarding binge eating is present.  D.   The binge eating occurs, on average, at least once a week for 3 months.  E.   The binge eating is not associated with the recurrent use of inappropriate compensatory behavior as in bulimia ner- vosa and does not occur exclusively during the course of bulimia nervosa or anorexia nervosa.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Binge-Eating Disorder   DSM- 5
  of food she ate, and felt disgusted with herself and very guilty after eating. She was also extremely distressed about her weight. She sadly acknowledged that her weight and shape were the most important factors in determining her feelings about herself. Source: Adapted with permission from the   American Journal of Psychiatry , Copyright 2000. American Psychiatric Association.  Age of Onset and Gender Differences  Eating disorders are often considered to be “modern” disorders, yet pathological patterns of eating date back several centuries (Silverman, 1997). St. Catherine of Sienna began to starve her- self when she was around 16 years of age. She died in 1380 (at the age of 32 or 33) because she refused to consume either food or water (Keel & Klump, 2003). Moreover, as far back as the sec- ond century, the Greek physician Galen referred to a syndrome characterized by overeating, vomiting, and fainting, which he termed   bulimos   (see Ziolko, 1996). It was not until the 1970s and 1980s, however, that eating disorders began to attract signif- icant attention. Clinicians began seeing more and more patients with pathological eating patterns. It soon became apparent that this was an important clinical problem. Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa do not occur in appre- ciable numbers before adolescence. Children as young as 7, though, have been known to develop eating disorders, especially anorexia nervosa (Bryant-Waugh & Lask, 2002). Anorexia nervosa is most likely to develop in 15- to 19-year-olds. For bulimia nervosa, the age group at highest risk is young women falling in the age range of 20 to 24 (Hoek & van Hoecken, 2003). Most patients with binge-eating disorder are older than those with anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa, generally between 30 and 50 years of age. Eating disorders have long been regarded as occurring pri- marily in women. Although in the past it was thought that the gender ratio was as high as 10:1, more recent estimates suggest that there are three females for every male with an eating disorder (Jones & Morgan, 2010). This downward revision of the gender ratio reflects the fact that eating disorders in men may have been underdiagnosed in the past because of the stereotype that they are female disorders. Another reason for the underdiagnosis of eating disorders in men is the gender bias in the   DSM   criteria. These emphasize the type of weight and shape concerns (e.g., desire to be thin) and methods of weight control (dieting) that are more typical of women. For men, body dissatisfaction often involves a wish to be more muscular. Over-exercising as a means of weight control is also more common in men. As a result, men are less likely to recognize that they have an eating disorder, are more likely to be misdiagnosed when they do, and are less likely to receive specialist treatment (Jones & Morgan, 2010). One established risk factor for eating disorders in men is homosexuality. Gay and bisexual men have higher rates of eating disorders than heterosexual men do (Feldman & Meyer, 2007). Gay men (like heterosexual men) value attractiveness and youth in their romantic partners. Because gay men (like women) are seeking to be sexually attractive to men, body dissatisfaction may therefore be more of an issue for gay men than it is for heterosexual men. In support of this idea, Smith and colleagues (2011) found that gay men were more dissatisfied with their bodies and had higher levels  Competitive eating contests, such as the hot dog eating contest that is held every year in Coney Island, New York, attract many spectators. During a 10-minute time span, some competitors are able to eat 60 or more hot dogs. Do you think this is a healthy sport? What messages does it send about food? In what ways is competitive eating different from binge eating disorder?  I n addition to anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating disorder, the   DSM-5   also includes a new category that is used to diagnose other clinically significant problems involv- ing feeding and eating. Purging disorder (which involves purging in normal weight people who have not eaten large amounts of food) is one example of this. Gone from the   DSM   is the diagno- sis of eating disorder not otherwise specified (EDNOS). Prior to  DSM-5 , the diagnosis of EDNOS was given to around 60 percent of adolescents and adults who sought treatment in outpatient settings (Eddy, Doyle, et al., 2008; Fairburn & Bohn, 2005). Changes to the diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa and buli- mia nervosa in   DSM-5   as well as the inclusion of BED as a new diagnosis are expected to make EDNOS a less meaningful and necessary diagnosis. As a result it has been removed.  thinking critically about DSM-5  Other Forms of Eating Disorders   DSM- 5
  of disordered eating than heterosexual men did. Moreover, gay men tended to believe that a potential mate would want them to be leaner than they themselves wanted to be. Other specific subgroups of men who are at higher risk of eating disorders are wrestlers and jockeys, who need to “make weight” in order to compete or work (Carlat et al., 1997).  Prevalence of Eating Disorders  The most common form of eating disorder is binge-eating disorder. Worldwide, and based on the most recent data, the lifetime prevalence of binge eating disorder is around 2 percent (Kessler et al., 2013). In the United States, community-based estimates from the National Comorbidity Survey indicate a life- time prevalence of around 3.5 percent in women and 2 percent in men (Hudson et al., 2007). It is also worth noting that the preva- lence of binge-eating disorder is higher in obese people and in the range of 6.5 to 8 percent (Grilo, 2002; Sansone et al., 2008). Worldwide, the prevalence of bulimia nervosa is estimated at 1 percent (Kessler et al., 2013). Data from the National Comorbidity Survey further show that the lifetime prevalence of bulimia nervosa in the United States is around 1.5 percent for women and 0.5 percent for men (Hudson et al., 2007). Some- what less frequent is anorexia nervosa. Estimates from the United States suggest that this disorder has a lifetime prevalence of 0.9 percent in women and 0.3 percent in men (Hudson et al., 2007). These figures are comparable to prevalence estimates from Swe- den, where the rate of anorexia nervosa is 1.2 percent in women and 0.29 percent in men (Bulik et al., 2006). Although anorexia nervosa is sometimes viewed as a very rare disorder, in its severe form it is about as common as schizophrenia. The risk of developing anorexia nervosa seemed to increase during the twentieth century. In one study, lifetime rates of this disorder were higher in people born after 1945 than before this time (Klump et al., 2007). This is true for both males and females. This increase is not fully explained by increased awareness of the disorder and better detection by clinicians. There was also a rise in the number of new cases of bulimia nervosa from 1970 to 1993 (Keel & Klump, 2003). However, much of this increase may have occurred in the time period up to 1982. A more recent analysis has indicated that the prevalence of bulimia nervosa decreased from 1982 to 1992 and remained stable from 1992 to 2002 (Keel et al., 2006). Stable rates of bulimia nervosa from 1990 to 2004 have also been reported (Crowther et al., 2008). Despite the encouraging news of a decrease in the prevalence of bulimia nervosa over the last few decades, many young peo- ple, particularly girls and young women in their adolescence and early adulthood, show some evidence of disturbed eating pat- terns or have distorted self-perceptions about their bodies. For example, in a sample of 4,746 middle and high school students, 41.5 percent of girls and 24.9 percent of boys reported problems with body image, and more than a third of the girls and almost a quarter of the boys said they placed a lot of importance on weight and shape with regard to their self-esteem (Ackard et al., 2007). Questionnaire studies further suggest that up to 19 per- cent of students report some bulimic symptoms (Hoek, 2002). Also of concern are findings from a survey of adults in Australia showing a twofold increase in binge eating, purging, and strict dieting or fasting in the period from 1995 to 2005 (Hay et al., 2008). Disordered eating behaviors that do not meet criteria for an eating disorder diagnosis are of concern because, in some cases, they may worsen over time, eventually leading to clinically significant problems. Table 9.3 shows some sample items from the Eating Disorders Inventory, a questionnaire measure that is often used in research.  Medical Complications of Eating Disorders  The tragic death of Ana Carolina Reston from kidney failure serves as a sad reminder of just how lethal a disorder anorexia nervosa is. In fact, anorexia nervosa has the highest mortality rate of any psychiatric disorder. The mortality rate for females with anorexia nervosa is more than 12 times higher than the mortality rate for females aged 15 to 24 in the general U.S. population (Sullivan, 1995, 2002). When patients with this disorder die, it  Men are now experiencing socio- cultural pressures to have toned and muscular bodies. For many men, body dissatisfaction takes the form of wanting to have a more muscular upper torso.  table   9.3  Sample Items from the Eating Disorders Inventory Sample Statement  I am terrified of gaining weight. I eat or drink in secrecy. I think my hips are too big. Source: Reproduced by special permission of the Publisher, Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc., 16204 North Florida Avenue, Lutz, Florida 33549, from the   Eating Disorder Inventory-3   by David M. Garner, PhD, Copyright 1984, 1991, 2004, by Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc. (PAR). Further reproduction is prohibited without permission of PAR.
  is most often because of medical complications. Overall, approxi- mately 3 percent of people with anorexia nervosa die from the con- sequences of their self-imposed starvation (Signorini et al., 2007). Malnutrition also takes its toll in other ways (see Mitchell & Crow, 2010). Many patients with anorexia nervosa disorder look extremely unwell. Their hair on the scalp thins and becomes brittle, as do their nails. Their skin becomes very dry, and downy hair (called “lanugo”) starts to grow on the face, neck, arms, back, and legs. Many patients also develop a yellowish tinge to their skin, especially on the palms of their hands and bottoms of their feet. Some of these problems are illustrated in Figure 9.2. Because they are so undernourished, people with this disor- der have a difficult time coping with cold temperatures. Their hands and feet are often cold to the touch and have a purplish- blue tinge due to problems with temperature regulation and lack of oxygen to the extremities. As a consequence of chronically low blood pressure, patients often feel tired, weak, dizzy, and faint. Thiamin (vitamin B1) deficiency may also be present; this could account for some of the depression and cognitive changes docu- mented in low-weight anorexia patients (Winston et al., 2000). Although many of these problems resolve when patients gain weight, anorexia nervosa may result in increased risk for osteopo- rosis in later life. This is because peak bone density is normally attained during the years of early adulthood. The failure to eat healthily during this time may result in more brittle and fragile bones forever (Attia & Walsh, 2007). People with anorexia nervosa can die from heart arrhythmias (irregular heartbeats). Sometimes this is caused by major imbalances in key electrolytes such as potassium (Mitchell & Crow, 2010). Chronically low levels of potassium (hypokalemia) can also result in kidney damage and renal failure severe enough to require dialysis. Abuse of laxatives, which occurs in 10 to 60 percent of patients with eating disorders (Roerrig et al., 2010) makes all of these problems much worse. Laxatives are used to induce diar- rhea so that the person feels thinner or to remove unwanted calories from the body. Laxative abuse can lead to dehydration, electrolyte imbalances, and kidney disease as well as damage to the bowels and gastrointestinal tract. Bulimia nervosa is much less lethal than anorexia nervosa, although it is still associated with a mortality rate that is approxi- mately twice that found in people of comparable age in the gen- eral population (Arcelus et al., 2011). Bulimia nervosa also creates a number of medical concerns (Mitchell & Crow, 2010). Purging can cause electrolyte imbalances and low potassium, which, as we have already mentioned, puts the patient at risk for heart abnor- malities. Another complication is damage to the heart muscle, which may be due to using ipecac syrup (a poison that causes vomiting). More typically, however, patients develop calluses on their hands from sticking their fingers down their throats to make themselves sick. In extreme cases, where objects such as a tooth- brush are used to induce vomiting, tears to the throat can occur. Because the contents of the stomach are acidic, patients dam- age their teeth when they throw up repeatedly. Brushing teeth immediately after vomiting damages them even more. Mouth ulcers and dental cavities are a common consequence of repeated purging, as are small red dots around the eyes that are caused by the pressure of throwing up. Finally, patients with buli- mia very often have swollen parotid (salivary) glands caused by repeatedly vomiting. These are known as “puffy cheeks” or “chipmunk cheeks” by many buli- mia sufferers. Although such swellings are not pain- ful, they are often quite noticeable to others.  Course and Outcome  We begin this section with a sobering statistic. After medical complications, the second most common cause of death in those who suffer from anorexia nervosa is suicide. Recent estimates suggest that one out of five deaths in individuals with anorexia nervosa is the result of suicide (Arcelus et al., 2011). Somewhere between 3 and 23 percent of patients with anorexia will make a suicide attempt, and rates of completed suicide are 50 times greater than they are in the general population (Franko & Keel, 2006; Keel et al., 2003). It has been suggested that patients who have lost their ability to maintain an “emotion- ally protective” low body weight are at particularly high risk of suicide (Crisp et al., 2006). Patients who are older when they first receive clinical attention for their disorder are also more likely to have a premature  figure   9.2  Anorexia nervosa takes its toll on the body and causes many medical problems. When starved, the body turns on itself in an effort to provide energy. Fat is burned first, then muscle. Eventually, organs are destroyed in the body’s struggle to find fuel.   Watch  the   Video   Eating Disorders   on   MyPsychLab  Brain and Nerves  can’t think right, fear of gaining weight, sad, moody, irritable, bad memory, fainting, changes in brain chemistry  Anorexia affects your whole body  Hair  hair thins and gets brittle  Kidneys  kidney stones, kidney failure  Body Fluids  low potassium, magnesium, and sodium  Heart  low blood pressure, slow heart rate, fluttering of the heart (palpitations), heart failure  Blood  anemia and other blood problems  Muscles and Joints  weak muscles, swollen joints, fractures, osteoporosis  Skin  bruise easily, dry skin, growth of fine hair all over body, get cold easily, yellow skin, nails get brittle  Hormones  periods stop, bone loss, problems growing, trouble getting pregnant. If pregnant, higher risk for miscarriage, having a C-section, baby with low birthweight, and post partum depression.  Intestines  constipation, bloating Dash line indicates that organ is behind other main organs.
  death (Arcelus et al., 2011). Bulimia nervosa is not associated with increased risk of completed suicide, although suicide attempts are made in 25 to 30 percent of cases (Franko & Keel, 2006). Although the clinical outcome for some patients is tragic, over the very long term recovery is possible. Löwe and colleagues (2001) examined what happened to patients with anorexia ner- vosa 21 years after they had first sought treatment. Reflecting the high morbidity associated with anorexia nervosa, 16 percent of the patients (all of whom were women) were no longer alive, having died primarily from complications of starvation or from suicide. Another 10 percent were still suffering from the disorder, and a further 21 percent had partially recovered. On the positive side, however, 51 percent of the individuals were fully recovered at the time of the follow-up. In another 6-year follow-up study, 52.1 percent of patients who had received outpatient cognitive behavioral therapy for their anorexia nervosa eventually recov- ered (Castellini et al., 2011). These findings provide grounds for optimism for those who suffer from this disorder. They indicate that even after a series of treatment failures it is still possible for women with anorexia nervosa to become well again. With regard to bulimia nervosa, in the long term, progno- sis tends to be quite good. Two outcome studies have shown that around 70 percent of women initially diagnosed with this disorder will be in remission and will no longer meet diagnostic criteria for any eating disorder by the end of an 11- to 12-year follow-up (Keel et al., 1999; Fichter & Quadflieg, 2007). The remaining 30 percent, however, will continue to experience sig- nificant difficulties with their eating. Substance-abuse problems, more frequent binges, more shape concerns, as well as a longer duration of illness predict worse outcomes over time (Castellini et al., 2011; Keel et al., 1999). Finally, like patients with bulimia nervosa, patients with binge-eating disorder also have high rates of clinical remission. Following a period of intensive treatment, two-thirds of a sample of 60 patients no longer had any form of eating disorder (Fichter & Quadflieg, 2007). In a larger study involving 137 Ital- ian patients who received individual cognitive-behavior therapy, 60 percent were found to be recovered when they were assessed 6 years after the end of treatment (Castellini et al., 2011). It is worth noting that, even when well, many individuals who recover from anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa still harbor residual food issues. They may be excessively concerned about shape and weight, restrict their dietary intakes, and overeat and purge in response to negative mood states (Sullivan, 2002). In other words, the idea of recovery is relative. Someone who no longer meets all of the diagnostic criteria for an eating disorder may still have issues with food and body image.  Diagnostic Crossover  One way in which eating disorders differ from other types of disorders is that there is a lot of diagnostic crossover. What this means is that it is quite common for someone who is diagnosed with one form of eating disorder to be later diagnosed with another eating disorder. Over a 7-year period, Eddy and col- leagues (2008) report that the majority of women in their study experienced diagnostic crossover. Bidirectional transitions between the two subtypes of anorexia nervosa (restricting and binge-purging) were especially common. Shifts from anorexia nervosa to bulimia nervosa also occurred in about a third of patients. Interestingly, however, there were no cases of direct transition from the restricting type of anorexia nervosa directly into bulimia nervosa. Instead, the transition to bulimia nervosa seems to occur after an earlier transition to the binge-purging subtype of anorexia nervosa. You may also recall that the main difference between patients with the binge-purging subtype of anorexia nervosa and bulimia ner- vosa is weight (and associated amenorrhea). So if someone with anorexia nervosa (binge-purge subtype) gains weight, the diagno- sis will change to bulimia nervosa to reflect this fact, even though there may not be a big clinical change in the illness itself. More- over, even after they have crossed over into bulimia nervosa, these women remain vulnerable to relapsing back into anorexia nervosa. This suggests that clinicians should pay attention to a past history of anorexia nervosa even when patients no longer meet the low-weight criterion necessary for its diagnosis. Only a minority of patients with bulimia nervosa transition into anorexia nervosa. In one study the figure was 14 percent (Eddy, Dorer, et al., 2008). In another it was 9.2 percent (Castellini et al., 2011). Crossovers from the restricting subtype of anorexia nervosa into binge-eating disorder do not seem to occur at all. Diagnostic crossover from bulimia nervosa into binge-eating disorder occurs in about 10.9 percent of cases (Castellini et al., 2011). Finally, we note that binge-eating disorder and anorexia nervosa appear to be quite distinct disorders. Over the course of a 12-year follow-up, no patient with binge-eating disorder devel- oped anorexia nervosa and no patient with anorexia nervosa devel- oped binge-eating disorder (Fichter & Quadflieg, 2007). In other words, there was no diagnostic crossover between these diagnoses. However, around 10 percent of patients who previously had binge-eating disorder transitioned into bulimia nervosa during this time. Figure 9.3 on p. 304 illustrates some of these trends.  Association of Eating Disorders With Other Forms of Psychopathology  Eating disorder diagnoses are commonly associated with other diagnosable psychiatric conditions. In fact, comorbidity is the rule rather than the exception (Hudson et al., 2007). For instance, approximately 68 percent of patients with anorexia nervosa, 63 percent of patients with bulimia nervosa, and almost 50 per- cent of people with binge-eating disorder are also diagnosed with depression (Brewerton et al., 1995; Halmi, et al., 1991; Hudson et al., 2007; O’Brien & Vincent, 2003). Obsessive-compulsive disorder is often found in patients with anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa (Kaye et al., 2004; Milos et al., 2002;
  O’Brien & Vincent, 2003). In addition, there is frequent co- occurrence of substance-abuse disorders in the binge-purging subtype of anorexia nervosa as well as in bulimia nervosa. The restrictive type of anorexia nervosa, however, tends not to be asso- ciated with higher rates of substance abuse (Halmi, 2010). Comorbid personality disorders are frequently diagnosed in people with eating disorders (Rø et al., 2005; see  0). Those with the restrictive type of anorexia nervosa are inclined toward personality disorders in the anxious-avoidant cluster (Cluster C; Skodol et al., 1993). In contrast, eating disorders that involve binge/purge syndromes (both anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa) are more likely to be associated with dramatic, emotional, or erratic (Cluster B) problems, especially borderline personality disorder (Halmi, 2010). Consistent with this, more than a third of patients with eating disorders have engaged in the kinds of self-harming behaviors (cut- ting or burning themselves, for example) that are symptomatic of borderline personality disorder (Paul et al., 2002). Personality disor- ders are similarly reported in patients with BED, although no clear pattern has emerged (Wilfley et al., 2000). People with BED also have high rates of anxiety disorders (65%), mood disorders (46%), and substance use disorders (23%; see Hudson et al., 2007). One problem with simple examinations of personality disor- ders in patients with eating disorders is that some of the distur- bances found in these patients could reflect the consequences of malnourishment. Starvation is known to increase both irritability and obsessionality (Keys et al., 1950). We must therefore be cau- tious in our conclusions. Even though the physiological consequences of eating dis- orders may exacerbate personality disturbances, they may only be enhancing traits that were present prior to the development of the illness. Research suggests that some personality traits in eating-disordered patients might both predate the onset of the disorder and remain even when the eating disorder remits and the patient has recovered (Kaye et al., 2004; Klump et al., 2004). Consistent with this, around two-thirds of a sample of patients with anorexia nervosa reported that they were rigid and perfec- tionistic, even as children (Anderluh et al., 2003).  Eating Disorders Across Cultures  Although the majority of research on eating disorders is conducted in the United States and Europe, eating disorders are not confined to these areas. Widespread eating disorder difficulties have been reported among both Caucasian and black South African college students (le Grange et al., 1998). Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are also clinical problems in Japan, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, and Korea (Lee & Katzman, 2002). Cases of eating disorders have also been documented in India and Africa. The prevalence of eating disorders in Iran is comparable to that in the United States (Nobakht & Dezhkam, 2000). And a few years ago, the first published report of five men in central China who were diagnosed with eating disor- ders appeared (Tong et al., 2005). Far from being confined to industrialized Western countries, eating disorders are becoming a problem worldwide. Being Caucasian, however, does appear to be associated with subclinical problems that may place individuals at higher risk for developing eating disorders. Examples of such problems include body dissatisfaction, dietary restraint, and a drive for thinness. A   meta-analysis   involving a total of 17,781 participants has shown that such attitudes and behaviors are significantly more prevalent in whites than in nonwhites (Wildes et al., 2001). Although Asian women exhibit levels of pathological eating similar to those of white women (Wildes et al., 2001), it has long  research cloSe-Up  Meta-analysis  A meta-analysis is a statistical method used to combine the results of a number of similar research studies. The data from each separate study are transformed into a common metric called the effect size. Doing this allows data from the various studies to be combined and then analyzed. You can think of a meta-analysis as being just like the research with which you are already familiar, except that the “participants” are indi- vidual research studies, not individual people!  figure   9.3  Diagnostic Crossover in Eating Disorders.   Diagnostic crossover is common in eating disorders with transitions between the two subtypes of anorexia nervosa being very common. Transitions from the binge- purge subtype of anorexia nervosa to bulimia nervosa also often occur. In the figure, the width of the arrow denotes the relative likelihood of any transition. (Adapted from Fichter & Quadflieg, 2007, and Eddy, Dorer, et al., 2008.)  BED   BN AN–R   AN–BP AN–R   = Anorexia nervosa–restricting subtype AN–BP   = Anorexia nervosa–binge-purge subtype BN   = Bulimia nervosa BED   = Binge eating disorder
  been held that African Americans are less susceptible to subclini- cal types of eating problems and body image concerns than Caucasians are. For example, in one sample of 1,061 black women, no case of anorexia nervosa was found. In contrast, out of a sample of 985 white women, 15 (1.5%) met clinical criteria for this disorder. Fewer black than white women also had buli- mia nervosa (0.4% versus 2.3%; see Striegel-Moore et al., 2003). However, as minorities become more and more integrated and internalize white, middle-class societal values about the desirability of thinness, we should expect to see increases in the rates of eating disorders. As an example of this, Alegria and col- leagues (2007) have demonstrated that rates of eating disorders were higher in Latinos who were born in the United States com- pared with those who were not. In The World Around Us box below we discuss the protective role of ethnic identity in African American women. A select number of the clinical features of diagnosed forms of eating disorders may also vary according to culture. For instance, about 58 percent of anorexia nervosa patients in Hong Kong are not excessively concerned about fatness. The reason they give for refusing food is fear of stomach bloating (Lee et al., 1993). Anorexia nervosa patients who were living in Britain but who had South Asian (Indian, Pakistani, Bangladeshi) ethnic origins also were less likely than patients with English ethnic origins to show evidence of fat phobia (Tareen et al., 2005). In yet another study, young women in Ghana who had anorexia nervosa were also not especially concerned about their weight or shape. Rather, they emphasized religious ideas of self-control and denial of hunger as the motivation for their self-starvation (Bennett et al., 2004). In a final example, Japa- nese women with eating disorders reported significantly lower levels of perfectionism and less of a drive for thinness than did American women with eating disorders (Pike & Mizushima, 2005). Findings such as these highlight the considerable role played by culture in the clinical presentation of eating disorders. Cases of anorexia nervosa have been reported throughout history. They have furthermore been shown to occur all over the world. In light of this reality, Keel and Klump (2003) have concluded that anorexia nervosa is not a culture-bound syndrome. Of course, as we have just noted, culture may influ- ence the disorder’s clinical manifestation. The more important point, however, is that anorexia nervosa is not a disorder that occurs simply because of exposure to Western ideals and the  the WorlD around us  Ethnic Identity and Disordered Eating  I n contrast to young white, Asian American, and Hispanic girls, black adolescent girls seem less inclined to use weight and appearance to fuel their sense of identity and self-worth (Grabe & Hyde, 2006; Polivy et al., 2005). This may provide them with some protection from the development of eating disorders. However, any protection afforded to black women seems to be linked to how strongly they identify with their ethnic group and how much they receive culturally consistent messages that value what their bodies naturally look like and support who they are. In a study of 322 African American female college students, Rogers and colleagues (2010) found that women who had stron- ger ethnic identities were less likely to have internalized U.S. societal beauty ideals about the importance of being thin and attractive. This is an important finding because, in the same study, internalization of these ideals was found to be linked to disordered eating. An important factor in the ethnic distribution and occurrence of eating disorders is therefore the extent to which minority women are both exposed to and willing to inter- nalize the same kind of white, middle-class values that have been linked to increased risk for eating disorders. There is already some evidence that the body dissatisfaction difference between blacks and whites is getting smaller over time (Grabe & Hyde, 2006). This highlights the importance of healthy role models for young black girls. Without these, black women will no longer remain unique among American ethnic groups in their lower levels of body dissatisfaction.  African American women who have a strong identification with their ethnicity and cultural heritage have less risk of developing eating disorders than African American women who have internalized white middle-class values about the desirability of thinness.
  modern emphasis on thinness. In contrast, bulimia nervosa does seem to be a culture-bound syndrome. More specifi- cally, it seems to occur in people who have had some exposure to Western ideals about thinness, who have access to large amounts of food, and who, because of modern plumbing, can purge in private (Keel, 2010).  in review  •   What are the major clinical differences between patients with anorexia nervosa and patients with bulimia nervosa? What clini- cal features do these two forms of eating disorders have in common?  •   How do the prevalence rates for eating disorders vary according to gender, sexual orientation, and ethnicity?  •   What kinds of medical problems do patients with eating disor- ders suffer from?  •   What is the long-term outcome for patients with anorexia nervosa? In what ways is the clinical outcome of patients with anorexia nervosa different from the clinical outcome of patients with bulimia nervosa?  •   Why is bulimia nervosa viewed as a culture-bound syndrome when anorexia nervosa is not?  Risk and Causal Factors in Eating Disorders  There is no single cause of eating disorders. In all probability, they reflect the complex interaction between genetic and envi- ronmental factors. Biological, sociocultural, family, and individ- ual variables likely all play a role. However, it is important not to regard these areas as distinct and in competition with each other. The question of whether eating disorders are caused by biologi- cal factors or by cultural pressures is not an appropriate one. Biological and cultural explanations are interlinked. For example, being exposed to cultural attitudes that emphasize thinness is significant in the development of eating disorders. However, only a small number of people who are exposed to such attitudes actually develop eating disorders. Genetic factors may give rise to individual differences that help explain why certain people are more sensitive than others to cultural attitudes and other environmental risk factors. In other words, eating disorders are best conceptualized in terms of the diathesis-stress model, where genes render some people more susceptible to environmental pressures and hence to the development of problematic eating attitudes and behaviors.  Biological Factors GENETICS   Much research attention is now being devoted to the study of genetic factors in eating disorders. This is because the tendency to develop an eating disorder has been shown to run in families (Wade, 2010). The biological relatives of people with anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa have elevated rates of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa themselves. In one large family study of eating disorders, the risk of anorexia nervosa for the relatives of individuals with anorexia nervosa was 11.4 times greater than for the relatives of the healthy controls (Strober et al., 2000). For the relatives of people with bulimia nervosa, the risk of bulimia nervosa was 3.7 times higher than it was for the relatives of the healthy controls (Strober et al., 2000). It is of additional interest that the relatives of patients with eating disorders are more likely to suffer from a variety of other disorders as well as eating disorders. For example, high rates of major depres- sive disorder are found in the relatives of patients with anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder (Lilenfeld et al., 1998; Lilenfeld et al., 2006; Mangweth et al., 2003). The relatives of people suffering from bulimia nervosa also have an increased likelihood of having problems with alcohol and drug dependence, while the relatives of those diagnosed with anorexia nervosa are at increased risk of obsessive-compulsive disorder and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder (Lilenfeld et al., 1998). As you know, family studies do not allow for the untangling of the different contributions of genetic and environmental influences. These kinds of questions are best resolved by twin and adoption studies. Presently, we have none of the latter. For- tunately, a number of twin studies do exist. Considered together, these studies suggest that both anorexia nervosa and bulimia ner- vosa are heritable disorders (Fairburn & Harrison, 2003; Wade, 2010). Indeed, it has been suggested that the contribution of genetic factors to the development of eating disorders may be about as strong as the contribution of genetic factors to bipolar disorder and schizophrenia (Kaye, 2008). There is provocative evidence for a gene (or genes) on chro- mosome 1 that might be linked to susceptibility to the restrictive type of anorexia nervosa (Grice et al., 2002). However, a recent study failed to find any links between 182 different candidate genes and various aspects of eating disorders such as lowest body mass index, drive for thinness, or body dissatisfaction (Root et al., 2011). These disappointing findings highlight the challenges asso- ciated with trying to identify the genetic basis of anorexia nervosa. Evidence has also suggested that susceptibility to bulimia nervosa, particularly self-induced vomiting, may be linked to chromosome 10 (Bulik, Devlin, et al., 2003). Of course, until these findings are widely replicated, they must be viewed as preliminary. Eating disorders have additionally been linked to genes that are involved in the regulation of the neurotransmitter serotonin (Wade, 2010). This makes sense, given the role that serotonin is known to play in the regulation of eating behavior. Furthermore, serotonin is known to be involved in mood. With this in mind, it is interesting to note that mood disorders and eating disorders often cluster together in families (Halmi, 2010). At present, researchers are still some distance away from understanding the precise role genes play in the development of eating disorders. Given the high degree of overlap between anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa (many women with
  anorexia nervosa later develop bulimia nervosa and many women with bulimia nervosa report histories of anorexia nervosa), it is likely that these two eating disorders may have some genetic factors in common (Helder & Collier, 2010). There is also rea- son to believe that genetic factors may play more of a role after puberty than before it (Klump et al., 2007). In other words, the magnitude of genetic influences may increase over the course of development. This could be because genetic factors may deter- mine how different individuals respond to the psychosocial risk factors (pressure to be thin, family conflict) that may develop or become more important during the adolescent years.  BrAIN ABNOrMAlITIES   An area of the brain that plays an im- portant role in eating is the   hypothalamus . Animal studies have demonstrated that when the lateral hypothalamus (the side areas of the hypothalamus) is stimulated electrically the animal will start to eat, even if it has eaten very recently. During stimulation of the lateral hypothalamus, animals will also tolerate shock and other unpleasant stimuli in order to gain access to food. There is no good evidence that abnormalities in the hypo- thalamus play a central role in eating disorders, however. Uher and Treasure (2005) review a series of case reports of patients with tumors in the hypothalamus. Although these were some- times associated with an increase or loss of appetite, there was no evidence that they resulted in specific eating disorders. In con- trast, damage to the frontal and the temporal cortex did seem to be linked to the development of anorexia nervosa in some cases and bulimia nervosa in others. This is interesting because the temporal cortex is known to be involved in body image percep- tion. Parts of the frontal cortex (particularly an area called the orbitofrontal cortex) also play a role in monitoring the pleasant- ness of stimuli such a smell and taste (van Kuyck et al., 2009). Although very speculative at this time, it is possible that the lateral hypothalamus acts as a site that integrates information relevant for regulating food intake. The lateral hypothalamus receives information from many parts of the brain, including the frontal cortex and the amygdala (which is a part of the brain involved in emotion and fear learning). Animal research suggests that a network involving these (and other) brain areas may be important not only for overeating in response to environmental cues but for suppressing eating in response to fear (Petrovich, 2011). As research progresses we will learn more about how the pieces of the puzzle fit together to result in different types of eat- ing disorders.  SET POINTS   There is a well-established tendency for our bod- ies to resist marked variation from some sort of biologically determined   set point   or weight that our individual bodies try to “defend” (Garner, 1997). Anyone intent on achieving and main- taining a significant decrease in body mass below his or her in- dividual set point may be trying to do this in the face of internal physiologic opposition, which is aimed at trying to get the body back close to its original set-point weight. One important kind of physiologic opposition designed to prevent us from moving far from our set point is hunger. As we lose more and more weight, hunger may rise to extreme lev- els, encouraging eating, weight gain, and a return to a state of equilibrium. Far from having little or no appetite, patients with anorexia nervosa may think about food constantly and make intense efforts to suppress their increasing hunger. Accordingly, chronic dieting may well enhance the likelihood that a person will encounter periods of seemingly irresistible impulses to gorge on large amounts of high-calorie food. For patients with bulimia nervosa, these hunger-driven impulses may escalate into uncon- trollable binge eating.  SErOTONIN   Serotonin   is a neurotransmitter that has been implicated in obsessionality, mood disorders, and impulsivity. It also modulates appetite and feeding behavior. Because many patients with eating disorders respond well to treatment with antidepressants (which target serotonin), some researchers have concluded that eating disorders involve a disruption in the sero- tonergic system (Bailer & Kaye, 2011). Serotonin is made from an essential amino acid called tryp- tophan. This can only be obtained from food. After tryptophan is consumed, it is converted to serotonin via a series of chemi- cal reactions. People with anorexia nervosa have low levels of 5-HIAA, which is a major metabolite of serotonin. This may be because they are eating so little food. In contrast, levels of 5-HIAA are normal in people with bulimia nervosa. What is interesting is that, after recovery, both of these patient groups have higher levels of 5-HIAA than control women do; they also have higher levels of 5-HIAA than they had when they were in the ill state (Kaye, 2008). Although the finding of higher levels of 5-HIAA in recovered patients compared to controls seems counterintuitive, it has been suggested that resuming normal eat- ing makes it possible to detect abnormalities in the serotonin sys- tem (such as higher levels of serotonin in several different brain areas) that might be involved in risk for eating disorders. Kaye and colleagues have further suggested that people with serotonin overactivity may use dieting as a way to regulate this by decreas- ing the amount of tryptophan that is available to make serotonin (Bailer & Kaye, 2010). Of course, it is important to remember that neurotransmit- ters like serotonin do not work in isolation. A change in the sero- tonin system will have implications for other neurotransmitter systems too (e.g., dopamine, norepinephrine). So the situation is undoubtedly complex. Nonetheless, investigating the role of serotonin in eating disorders is still an active area of research.  Sociocultural Factors  What is the ideal body shape for women in Western culture? Next time you glance at a glossy fashion magazine, take a moment to consider the messages contained in its pages. The overall body size of the models that appear on the covers of such magazines as   Vogue   and   Cosmopolitan   has become increasingly
  thinner over the years (Sypeck et al., 2004). Young women are avid consumers of such magazines and are bombarded with images of unrealistically thin models. These magazines are also widely available all over the world.   British Vogue   is published in 40 or more countries and can be found in India, Argentina, and Kenya among other places (see Gordon, 2000). Moreover, social pressures toward thinness may be particularly powerful in higher socioeconomic backgrounds, from which a majority of girls and women with anorexia nervosa appear to come (McClelland & Crisp, 2001). It is likely that thinness became deeply rooted as a cultural ideal in the 1960s, although prior to this time women had certainly been concerned with their weight and appearance. However, the type of body that was regarded as glamorous and attractive (e.g., Marilyn Monroe) was more curvaceous. One landmark event was the arrival of Twiggy on the fashion scene. Twiggy was the first superthin supermodel. Although her appearance was initially regarded as shocking, it did not take long for the fashion industry to embrace the look she exemplified. The emphasis on thinness in the fashion industry continues. Although, as we noted earlier, some efforts are being made to exclude excessively thin models from the runways, these changes are still being resisted by many designers. In an example of the glamorization of anorexia, British supermodel Kate Moss has even made up a new word to describe herself. The word is “rexy,” a hybrid term that combines “anorexic” and “sexy.” A provocative illustration of the importance of the media in creating pressures to be thin comes from a now classic study that was done by Anne Becker and her colleagues (2002). When Becker first began conducting research in Fiji in the 1990s, she was struck by the considerable percentage of Fijians (especially women) who were overweight with respect to their Western counterparts. From a cultural perspective, however, this made sense. Within Fijian culture, being fat was associated with qualities that were highly valued such as being strong, able to work, and kind and generous. Being thin, in contrast, was regarded negatively because it was thought to reflect being sickly, incompetent, or having somehow received poor treatment. Culturally, fatness was preferred over thinness, and dieting was viewed as offensive. What was also striking was the total absence of any condition that could be considered an eating disorder. After television came to Fiji, however, the cultural climate changed. Not only were Fijians able to see programs such as  Beverly Hills 90210   and   Melrose Place   that were popular at that time, but many young women also began to express concerns about their weight and dislike of their bodies. For the first time, women in Fiji started to diet in earnest. The young Fijian women studied by Becker also made comments that suggested that their body dissatisfaction and wish to lose weight were motivated by a desire to emulate the actors they had seen on television. Although Becker did not collect information about eating disorders themselves (she measured attitudes toward eating), this “natural experiment” provides us with some anecdotal information as to the way in which Western values about thinness may begin to infest themselves into foreign cultural environments. In another reflection of this, after 51 years of Nigeria being unsuccessful in the Miss World beauty pageant, a 19-year-old Nigerian contestant finally won the coveted crown in 2001. Her success was later attrib- uted to the fact that, for the first time, Nigerians had selected a contestant to represent them who was not considered to be beauti- ful by local standards on account of being too thin (Onishi, 2002).  Family Influences  Clinicians have long been aware that certain problems seem to regularly characterize the families of patients with anorexia ner- vosa, prompting many clinicians to advocate a family therapy approach to treatment intervention (Lock et al., 2001). Echoing this sentiment, more than one-third of patients with anorexia  British supermodel Kate Moss has said that one of her mottos is “Nothing tastes as good as skinny feels.”  British model Twiggy was the first superthin model to achieve international fame.
  nervosa reported that family dysfunction was a factor that con- tributed to the development of their eating disorder (Tozzi et al., 2003). Patients with anorexia nervosa perceive their families as more rigid, less cohesive, and as having poorer communication than healthy control participants do (Vidovic et al., 2005). In addition, many of the parents of patients with eating disorders have long-standing preoccupations regarding the desirability of thinness, dieting, and good physical appearance (Garner & Garfinkel, 1997). Like their children, they have per- fectionistic tendencies (Woodside et al., 2002). Family factors have also been studied in connection with bulimia nervosa. Both white and ethnic minority (black, Hispanic, and biracial) adolescents with bulimia nervosa perceive their fami- lies to be less cohesive than their parents do (Hoste et al., 2007). Fairburn and colleagues (1997) have also noted that women with bulimia nervosa could be differentiated from both a general psy- chiatric control group and a healthy control group on such risk factors as high parental expectations, other family members’ diet- ing, and degree of critical comments from other family members about shape, weight, or eating. In a large sample of college-age women, the strongest predictor of bulimic symptoms was the extent to which family members made disparaging comments about the woman’s appearance and focused on her need to diet (Crowther et al., 2002). Still, when attempting to depict family characteristics associ- ated with eating disorders, we must remember that having an individual with an eating disorder in the family is likely to affect family functioning in a negative way. That is, the causal con- nection, if any, might be in the other direction. In fact, recent longitudinal data from a twin study suggest that disordered eat- ing attitudes may predate parent–child conflict (Spanos et al., 2010). If this finding is replicated in future studies, we may need to reconsider the role of family conflict as a risk factor for the development of eating problems.  Individual risk Factors  Not everyone who lives in a society that places excessive empha- sis on being thin goes on to develop an eating disorder. If that were the case, eating disorders would be much more prevalent than they are. There must be other factors that increase a given person’s susceptibility to the development of disordered eating. As we noted earlier, some of these factors may be biological, while others may be more psychological in nature. In a further reflection of gene–environment interaction, genetic factors may actually influence some of the traits (e.g., perfectionism, obses- siveness, anxiety) that may make some people more likely to respond to cultural pressures with disturbed eating patterns.  GENDEr   As you have already learned, eating disorders are much more frequently found in women than in men. Being female is a strong risk factor for developing eating disorders, particularly anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa (Jacobi et al., 2004). Moreover, the greatest period of risk for these disorders occurs in adolescence. Binge-eating disorder does not follow this pattern, however. The onset of binge-eating disorder is typically well after adolescence. Binge-eating disorder is also much more likely to be found in males as well as in females. For men (but not for women) sexual orientation is a risk factor for disordered eating. As we noted earlier, this may be because gay and bisexual men are trying to be attractive to men, who (regardless of sexual orientation) typically place great emphasis on physical appearance. However, being in a relation- ship may moderate the risk for disordered eating. Brown and Keel (2012a) have recently shown that gay and bisexual men in their 30s and 40s who were in relationships reported less of a drive for thinness and dieted less frequently than men of the same age who were single and without a partner.  INTErNAlIzING ThE ThIN IDEAl   The Duchess of Windsor once said that you could never be too rich or too thin. Clearly she had internalized the thin ideal, buying into the notion that being thin is highly desirable. Think for a moment about the ex- tent to which you think this way. Do you regard thin people as unhealthy and weak? Or do you associate being thin with feeling attractive, being popular, and being happy? The extent to which people internalize the thin ideal is associated with a range of problems that are thought to be risk factors for eating disorders. These include body dissatisfaction, dieting, and negative affect (Stice, 2002). In fact, there is empirical evidence to suggest that  In her home country of Nigeria, Agbani Darego was considered too thin to be beautiful. Nonethe- less, she was selected to represent the country in the 2001 Miss World con- test and won the coveted crown.
  internalizing the thin ideal may be an early component of the causal chain that culminates in disordered eating (McKnight In- vestigators, 2003; Stice, 2001).  PErFECTIONISM   Perfectionism   (defined as the pursuit of unattainably high standards combined with an intolerance of mistakes) has long been regarded as an important risk factor for eating disorders (Bruch, 1973). This is because people who are perfectionistic may be much more likely to subscribe to the thin ideal and relentlessly pursue the “perfect body.” It has also been suggested that perfectionism helps maintain bulimic pathol- ogy through the rigid adherence to dieting that then drives the binge/purge cycle (Fairburn et al., 1997). Research supports the association of perfectionism and eat- ing disorders (Bardone-Cone et al., 2007). This is especially true for anorexia nervosa. In a study of 322 women, Halmi and colleagues (2000) found that women with anorexia nervosa scored higher on a measure of perfectionism than did a sample of controls without an eating disorder. The women with anorexia nervosa scored higher on perfectionism regardless of whether they had the restricting subtype of anorexia nervosa or subtypes that involved either purging or binge eating and purging. A large proportion of bulimia nervosa patients also demonstrate a long-standing pattern of excessive perfectionism (Anderluh et al., 2003; Garner & Garfinkel, 1997). Of course, any personality characteristics found in eating- disordered patients could be the result of the eating disorder itself rather than contributory in a causal sense. But if this were the case, recovery from anorexia nervosa would be followed by a reduction in perfectionism. Yet this does not seem to happen (Bardone-Cone et al. 2007). Perfectionism also seems to predate disordered eating in those with anorexia nervosa (Halmi et al., 2012) again suggesting that perfectionism is not a simple corre- late of eating problems. Overall, the research findings support the idea that perfectionism is an enduring personality trait that places people at higher risk for the development of eating disorders (Lilenfeld et al., 2006; Stice, 2002). Perfectionism may also have a genetic basis. In a twin study, high levels of perfectionism were found in the twins with anorexia nervosa, as expected. However, high levels of perfectionism were also found in the co-twins, who did not suffer from eating disorders (Wade et al., 2008). Interestingly, men with eating disorders are less perfectionistic than are women with eating disorders (Woodside et al., 2004). If men are generally less perfectionistic than women, this might help them avoid having some of the weight and shape concerns that seem to be a stepping stone to the development of eating disorders.  NEGATIvE BODy IMAGE   One consequence of sociocultural pressure to be thin is that some young girls and women develop highly intrusive and pervasive perceptual biases regarding how “fat” they are (e.g., Fallon & Rozin, 1985; Rodin, 1993; Wiseman et al., 1992; Zellner et al., 1989). In sharp contrast, young Amish people (who live radically separated from the modern world) do not display such body image distortions (Platte et al., 2000). This supports the notion that sociocultural influences are implicated in the discrepancy between the way many young girls and women perceive their own bodies and the “ideal” female form as represented in the media. Such perceptual biases lead girls and women to believe that men prefer more slender shapes than they in fact do. Many women also feel evaluated by other women, believing that their female peers have even more strin- gent standards of weight and shape than they do themselves. It would be one thing if women had a reasonable chance of attaining their “ideal” bodies simply by not exceeding an average caloric intake or by maintaining a healthy weight. Quite simply, this is not possible for most people. In fact, as pointed out by Garner (1997), the average body weight of young American women has been increasing over the past four decades at least, probably as a consequence of general improvements in nutrition, pediatric health care, and other factors as well (e.g., the widespread availabil- ity of high-calorie foods). Yet, as women’s average weight has been increasing since the late 1950s, the weight of such cultural icons of attractiveness as   Playboy   centerfolds and Miss America contestants has decreased at a roughly comparable rate. It has been calculated that 70 percent of   Playboy   centerfolds have a body mass index (see Table 9.4) below 18.5 (Katzmarzyk & Davis, 2001).  Body dissatisfaction is a risk factor for disordered eating.  table   9.4  Calculating Body Mass Index weight (lb.) height (in.) 2   *   703   =   BMI BMI  Healthy   18.5–24.9 Overweight   25–29.9 Obese   30–39.9 Morbidly obese   40
  Even children’s toys promote unrealistically slender ideals. Consider, for instance, the size and shape of the Barbie doll. For an average woman to achieve Barbie’s proportions she would have to be 7 feet 2 inches tall, lose 10 inches from her waist, and add 12 inches to her bust (Moser, 1989). The research literature strongly implicates body dissat- isfaction as an important risk factor for pathological eating (McKnight Investigators, 2003). Indeed, in a recent prospective longitudinal study, body dissatisfaction emerged as the most powerful predictor of the onset of eating disorders in a sample of almost 500 adolescent girls (Stice et al., 2011). Body dissatisfac- tion is also associated with dieting and with negative affect. Point- edly, if we don’t like how we look, we are likely to feel bad about ourselves. We may also try to lose weight in order to look better.  DIETING   When people wish to be thinner, they typically go on a diet. Nearly all instances of eating disorders begin with the “normal” dieting that is routine in our culture. Have you ever dieted? Most people have, at some point in their lives (Jeffrey et al., 1991). Esti- mates are that, at any one time, approximately 39 percent of women and 21 percent of men are trying to lose weight (Hill, 2002). Dieting is a risk factor for the development or worsening of eating disorders (Jacobi et al., 2004; Striegel-Moore & Bulik, 2007). In a large sample of adolescent girls, body dissatisfaction and dieting predicted symptoms of bulimia nervosa at a 1-year follow-up (Johnson & Wardle, 2005). In another large-scale lon- gitudinal study, it was found that the majority of adolescent girls who went on to develop anorexia nervosa had been dieters (Patton et al., 1990). As we all know, however, not everyone who diets develops an eating disorder. And in some cases diets can be helpful. For example, when overweight women were randomly assigned to either a low-calorie diet or a waiting list control group (that did not involve a diet), those who received the diet lost weight and showed a decrease in bulimic symptoms (Presnell & Stice, 2003). So why has dieting been linked to eating disorders? As Stice (2002) notes in his comprehensive review of this topic, when our efforts to diet fall short, it is almost inevitable that we will feel bad about ourselves (see also Ackard et al., 2002). Dieting itself may therefore not be the real problem (which is good news for people who are obese and who need to lose weight). Rather, it may be the case that the people who often report that they are trying to lose weight are the people who are most unhappy with their bodies and who are most inclined to feel negatively about themselves when they fail to stick to their diet plans. Other factors, such as perfectionism, may also play a role. Those who have the highest expectations of themselves may be the people who are most likely to feel bad when they fail to meet their own self-imposed high standards.  NEGATIvE EMOTIONAlITy   Negative affect   (feeling bad) is a causal risk factor for body dissatisfaction (Stice, 2002). When we feel bad, we tend to become very self-critical. We may focus on our limitations and shortcomings while magnifying our flaws and defects. This seems to be especially true of individuals with eating disorders, who, like people with depression, tend to show distorted ways of thinking and of processing information received from the environment (e.g., Butow et al., 1993; Garner et al., 1997). In many cases, there is widespread negative self- evaluation (e.g., Fairburn et al., 1997). These cognitive distor- tions (“I’m fat; I’m a failure; I’m useless”) have the potential to make people feel even worse about themselves. Longitudinal studies have confirmed that depression and general negative affect are predictive of a high risk for later develop- ing an eating disorder (Johnson, Cohen, et al., 2002; Leon et al., 1997). Moreover, evidence suggests that negative affect may work to maintain binge eating (see Stice, 2002). Patients often report that they engage in binges when they feel stressed, down, or bad about themselves. They further indicate that in the very short term, eating provides much needed comfort. These reports are highly consistent with affect-regulation models that view binge eating as a distraction from negative feelings (see Vögele & Gibson, 2010). Of course, a major problem is that after binges patients feel disap- pointed or even disgusted with themselves. In short, a difficult situ- ation leads to behavior that makes circumstances even worse.  ChIlDhOOD SExUAl ABUSE   Childhood sexual abuse has been implicated in the development of eating disorders (Jacobi et al., 2004). However, there is some debate about whether sexual abuse is truly a risk factor for eating disorders (see Stice, 2002). In one prospective study, Vogeltanz-Holm and colleagues (2000) failed to find that early sexual abuse predicted the later onset of binge eating. However, another prospective study found that children who had been sexually abused or physically neglected had higher rates of eating disorders and eating problems in adolescence and adulthood (Johnson, Cohen, et al., 2002). A meta-analysis of 53 studies also revealed a weak—but positive—association between childhood sexual abuse and eating pathology (Smolak & Murnen, 2002).  Dieting is a risk factor for the development or worsening of eating disorders
  This suggests that the two variables are linked in some way, although the precise nature of the link is not yet clear. One possibility is that being sexually abused increases the risk of developing other known risk factors for eating disorders, such as having a negative body image or high levels of negative affect. In other words, the causal pathway from early abuse to later eating disorder may be an indirect one (rather than a direct one) that involves an array of other intervening variables.  in review  •   What evidence suggests that genetic factors may play a role in the development of eating disorders?  •   What brain areas are implicated in eating and eating disorders?  •   What neurotransmitter has been implicated (and most well stud- ied) in eating disorders?  •   What individual characteristics are associated with increased risk for eating disorders?  •   How might a diathesis-stress model be used to explain the development of eating disorders?  Treatment of Eating Disorders  Patients with eating disorders are often very conflicted about getting well. Approximately 17 percent of patients with severe eating disorders have to be committed to a hospital for treatment against their will (Watson, Bowers, & Andersen, 2000). Suicide attempts are often made, and clinicians need to be mindful of this risk, even when patients have received a great deal of treat- ment (Franko et al., 2004). This ambivalence toward recovery is apparent in the behavior of individuals admitted to inpatient units. Hospitalization also often means that those with anorexia nervosa will be exposed to other patients who are thinner and more experienced than they are. This can lead to competitive pressure to be the “best anorexic” patient on the unit (Wilson, Grilo, & Vitousek, 2007). Some “pro-ana” (short for “pro-anorexia”) or “pro-mia” (“pro-bulima”) websites actively support anorexic or bulimic behavior, creating much concern in the treatment community. These sites are often visited by young people (Custers & Van den Bulck, 2009). An experimental study has also shown that exposure to the material on these websites has significant nega- tive consequences for young women. After viewing material on a pro-anorexia website, undergraduate participants reported more negative affect and felt less positive about themselves and their bodies than did participants assigned to view other websites that concerned fashion or home décor (Bardone-Cone & Cass, 2007).  Treatment of Anorexia Nervosa  Individuals with anorexia nervosa view the disorder as a chronic condition and are generally pessimistic about their potential for recovery (Holliday et al., 2005). They have a high dropout rate from therapy, and patients with the binge-purging subtype of anorexia nervosa are especially likely to terminate inpatient treat- ment prematurely (Steinhausen, 2002; Woodside et al., 2004). Making the situation even worse, there have been surprisingly few controlled studies on which to base an informed judgment about which treatment modality will work best (le Grange & Lock, 2005; Wilson, Grilo, & Vitousek, 2007). In part, this is due to the fact that the disorder is rare. However, patients who suffer from anorexia nervosa are also often extremely reluctant to seek treatment. And when they do, taking part in research stud- ies is unlikely to be a priority for them. These factors combine to make treatment research extremely difficult. The most immediate concern with patients who have anorexia nervosa is to restore their weight to a level that is no longer life threatening. In severe cases, this requires hospitaliza- tion and extreme measures such as intravenous feeding. This is followed by rigorous control of the patient’s caloric intake so as to progress toward a targeted range of weight gain (Andersen et al., 1997). Normally, this short-term effort is successful. However, without treatment designed to address the psychological issues that fuel the anorexic behavior, any weight gain will be temporary and the patient will soon need medical attention again. In some cases aggressive treatment efforts can backfire (Strober, 2004).  MEDICATIONS   Antidepressants are sometimes used in the treat- ment of anorexia nervosa, although there is no evidence that they are especially effective (Brown & Keel, 2012b). In contrast, research suggests that treatment with an antipsychotic medication called olanzapine may be beneficial. Antipsychotic medications (which help with disturbed thinking) are routinely used in the treatment of schizophrenia (see  3). These medications also provide benefits in the treatment of anorexia nervosa, which is characterized by distorted beliefs about body shape and size. More importantly, one side effect of olanzapine is weight gain. Although this is a problem for patients with schizophrenia, in the treatment of anorexia nervosa weight gain is obviously much more desirable.  FAMIly ThErAPy   For adolescents with anorexia nervosa, family therapy is considered to be the treatment of choice. The best-studied approach, which (very importantly) blames neither the parents nor the child for the anorexia nervosa, is known as the Maudsley model (le Grange & Lock, 2005). A typical treatment program involves 10 to 20 sessions spaced over 6 to 12 months. The treatment has three phases. In the refeeding phase, the therapist works with the parents and supports their efforts to help their child (typically a daughter) to eat health- ily once more. Family meals are observed by the therapist, and efforts are made to guide the parents as a functioning support team for their daughter’s recovery. After the patient starts to gain weight, the negotiations for a new pattern of relationships phase begins, and family issues and problems begin to be addressed. Later, in the termination phase of treatment, the focus is on the development of more healthy relationships between the patient and her parents (see Lock et al., 2001).
  Randomized controlled trials   have shown that patients treated with family therapy for 1 year do better than patients who are assigned to a control treatment (where they receive sup- portive counseling on an individual basis). Five years after treat- ment, 75 to 90 percent of patients show full recovery (le Grange & Lock, 2005). In a more recent study, 121 adolescents were randomly assigned to receive either family-based treat- ment or individual therapy. Both treatments involved a total of 24 hours of treatment spaced over the course of a year. At the end of treatment, 42 percent of patients who received family treatment were in full remission. For those who received individ- ual therapy, the corresponding figure was 23 percent. When fol- lowed up another year later, 49 percent of the patients who had received family-based therapy were well, compared with 23 per- cent of those who had been treated with individual therapy (Lock et al., 2010). What is encouraging about these findings is that that overwhelming majority of adolescents completed the treatments and did not drop out. This suggests that, although individual therapy (which encouraged weight gain, the develop- ment of autonomy, and accepting responsibility for food-related issues) was slightly less efficacious overall than family treatment, it was still very acceptable to the adolescents who received it and it still provided some benefit. This is good news, especially for adolescents whose family members are unable or unwilling to participate in family treatment. Not surprisingly, family treatment is more helpful for some patients than it is for others. Patients who develop anorexia ner- vosa before age 19 and have been ill for fewer than 3 years seem to do better than patients who have been ill for longer or who have bulimia nervosa (Dare & Eisler, 2002). This highlights the importance of early treatment, which may save some patients from a lifetime of suffering. For patients who are older or who have a long history of anorexia nervosa, the Maudsley approach unfortunately provides little clinical benefit (Wilson, Grilo, & Vitousek, 2007).  COGNITIvE-BEhAvIOrAl ThErAPy   Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (CBT) , which involves changing behavior and mal- adaptive styles of thinking, has proved to be very effective in treating bulimia nervosa. Because anorexia nervosa shares many features with bulimia nervosa, CBT is often used with anorexia nervosa patients as well (Vitousek, 2002). The recommended length of treatment is 1 to 2 years. A major focus of the treat- ment involves modifying distorted beliefs concerning weight and food, as well as distorted beliefs about the self that may have contributed to the disorder (e.g., “People will reject me unless I am thin”). Pike and colleagues (2003) treated a sample of 33 women who had anorexia nervosa, after they had been discharged from the hospital. Over the course of 1 year, the women received either 50 sessions of CBT or nutritional counseling. Despite this, only 17 percent of patients who received CBT showed full recov- ery. None of the women who received nutritional counseling was fully well (i.e., normal weight, no binge eating or purging, and with eating attitudes and concerns about weight within normal limits) at the end of treatment. The limited success of CBT for patients with anorexia nervosa may be due to the extreme cog- nitive rigidity that is characteristic of those with this disorder (Brown & Keel, 2012a). There is clearly a need for new treat- ment developments, particularly for older patients with more long-standing problems.  Treatment of Bulimia Nervosa MEDICATIONS   It is quite common for patients with bulimia nervosa to be treated with antidepressant medications. Research- ers became interested in using these medications after it became clear that many patients with bulimia nervosa also suffer from mood disorders. Generally speaking (and in contrast to patients  Family therapy is now regarded as the treatment of choice for adoles- cents with anorexia nervosa. The therapy is most effective for those in the earlier stages of the illness.  research cloSe-Up  Randomized Controlled Trials  A randomized controlled trial involves a specific treatment group (which is the group the researchers are most inter- ested in) as well as a control treatment group (against which the treatment group will be compared). Participants have an equal chance of being placed in either group because which group they go into is randomly determined.
  with anorexia nervosa), patients taking antidepressants do better than patients who are given inert, placebo medications. A posi- tive response is usually apparent within the first 3 weeks. People who do not show early improvement are unlikely to benefit from further treatment with the same medication (Sysko et al., 2010). Perhaps surprisingly, antidepressants seem to decrease the frequency of binges as well as improve patients’ mood and preoc- cupation with shape and weight (McElroy et al., 2010).  COGNITIvE-BEhAvIOrAl ThErAPy   The leading treatment for bulimia nervosa is CBT. Most of the current treatment ap- proaches are based on the work of Fairburn and colleagues in Oxford, England. Multiple controlled studies that include post- treatment and long-term follow-up outcomes attest to the clini- cal benefits of CBT for bulimia (Fairburn, Jones et al., 1993; Wilson, 2010). Such studies have included comparisons with medication therapy (chiefly antidepressants) and with interper- sonal psychotherapy (IPT; see Agras et al., 2000). They generally reveal CBT to be superior. In fact, combining CBT and medica- tions produces only a modest increment in effectiveness over that attainable with CBT alone. The “behavioral” component of CBT for bulimia nervosa focuses on normalizing eating patterns. This includes meal plan- ning, nutritional education, and ending binging and purging cycles by teaching the person to eat small amounts of food more regularly. The “cognitive” element of the treatment is aimed at changing the cognitions and behaviors that initiate or perpetuate a binge cycle. This is accomplished by challenging the dysfunc- tional thought patterns typically present in bulimia nervosa, such as the “all-or-nothing” or dichotomous thinking described earlier. For instance, CBT challenges the tendency to divide all foods into “good” and “bad” categories. This is done by provid- ing factual information, as well as by arranging for the patients to demonstrate to themselves that ingesting “bad” food does not inevitably lead to a total loss of control over eating. Figure 9.4 shows a cognitive worksheet that was completed by a patient. It provides a good example of the kind of “hot thought” that can facilitate a binge. Treatment with CBT clearly helps to reduce the severity of symptoms in patients with bulimia nervosa. Still, patients with the disorder are rarely entirely well at the end of treatment (Lundgren et al., 2004). Binging and purging is eliminated in around 30 to 50 percent of cases (Wilson, 2010). Even after treatment, weight and shape concerns may remain. In an effort to improve treatment efficacy, new approaches such as dialectical behavior therapy (which is a treatment for borderline personal- ity disorder; see  0) are now being explored, with some success (Safer et al., 2001; Chen & Safer, 2010). Another prom- ising development involves using more individualized cognitive- behavior therapy approaches that are specifically tailored to the needs of the patient as opposed to a more standardized treatment format (Ghaderi, 2006).  figure   9.4  Cognitive Worksheet.  Source: Reproduced from M. Cooper, G. Todd, and A. Wells,   Bulimia Nervosa :   A Cognitive Therapy Programme for Clients   with per- mission from Jessica Kingsley Publishers. Copyright © 2000 Myra Cooper, Gillian Todd, and Adrian Wells.  Emma’s completed worksheet: Identifying permissive thoughts Feelings and sensations  Anxious Heavy Blank • What feelings did you have? • What body sensations did you notice?  Situation  Friday, at college, alone, had a free period, thinking about my assignment (how dicult it was going to be). Ate a bar of chocolate, knew I was going to binge. Got on the bus to town, went to Burger King— had a burger, two portions off ries, a milkshake, one big bar of chocolate, another smaller bar of chocolate. • When was it? • Where were you? • Who were you with? • What were you doing? • What were you thinking about?  Permissive thoughts  I might as well keep eating now I’ve started. I can make myself sick aerwards— so it doesn’t matter—I can have what I want and I won’t gain weight. I might as well carry on until my money has run out. I’ve got to eat more and more. • What were you saying to yourself that made it easier to keep eating? • Identify and circle the hot thought. is is the thought that makes it most likely that you will binge.
  One of the newest developments in the treatment of eating disorders is to adopt a transdiagnostic approach to treatment. As we have already mentioned, the majority of patients with eating disorders have a mixed clinical picture. What this means is that they show some symptoms of anorexia and some symptoms of bulimia, combined in a variety of ways. Fairburn and colleagues (2009) have reformulated cognitive behavior therapy for bulimia nervosa so that it is now a relevant treatment for pathological eating, no matter what the diagnosis is. One form of the treat- ment is quite focused, targeting eating issues as well as concerns about shape and weight, extreme dieting, purging, and binge eating. The other form of the treatment is broader and also addresses such things as perfectionism, low self-esteem, and rela- tionship problems. Results from a randomized control trial show that patients who receive these treatments do much better than those assigned to a waiting list condition. At the end of both treatments, regardless of their initial diagnosis, more than half of the sample had responded well. There were also some hints that patients who had more problems did a little better when they received the broader treatment, whereas for more straightforward cases the focused form of treatment was very successful. It is impor- tant to mention that very–low-weight patients with anorexia were excluded from this study. Overall, however, the results sug- gest that the form of the treatment that a patient receives may not need to be tailored to a very specific   DSM   diagnosis. Rather, “transdiagnostic” treatments may have a lot of promise for patients with eating disorders, broadly defined.  Treatment of Binge Eating Disorder  BED has attracted a lot of attention from researchers, and a number of different treatment approaches have been suggested. Due to the high level of comorbidity between binge-eating dis- order and depression, antidepressant medications are sometimes used to treat this disorder. Other categories of medications, such as appetite suppressants and anticonvulsant medications, have also been a focus of interest (McElroy et al., 2010). Sibutramine, a medication that inhibits the reuptake of serotonin and norepi- nephrine, has been shown to reduce the frequency of binges and to be associated with more weight loss than a placebo medication in a one clinical trial (Wilfley et al., 2008). In one of the largest and most scientifically rigorous studies to date, Wilson and colleagues (2010) randomly assigned 205 overweight or obese men and women who met diagnostic crite- ria for BED to one of three different treatments. Some people received interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT), which is a therapy sometimes used in the treatment of depression (see Chapter 7). Others received CBT in the form of a self-help book ( Overcoming Binge Eating , Fairburn, 1995), guided by a therapist. People in the third group were assigned to a behavioral weight loss treat- ment that involved exercise and moderate restriction of calories. So how did everyone do? At the end of 6 months of treatment, there were no significant differences between the groups with regard to remission from binge eating. However, at 2-year follow up, people who had received either IPT or guided CBT were doing better than those in the behavioral weight loss group. What is also noteworthy is that the dropout rate was much lower for people in the IPT group (7% dropped out) than it was in the guided CBT (30%) or behavioral weight loss groups (28%). This is important because, overall, the dropout rate for minori- ties in this study was very high (approximately one-third). The findings therefore suggest that for racial and ethnic minorities with BED, interpersonal psychotherapy might be a particularly suitable treatment approach.  in review  •   What factors make eating disorders (especially anorexia nervosa) so difficult to treat?  •   Describe the main features of the Maudsley approach for the treatment of anorexia nervosa. For what kind of patients does this approach yield better results?  •   What treatment approaches have been shown to be helpful for binge eating disorder?  •   Why do you think cognitive-behavioral therapy is so beneficial for patients with bulimia nervosa?  •   What is a transdiagnostic treatment approach?  The Problem of Obesity  Humans have evolved to be able to store surplus energy as fat. This has obvious advantages: It serves as a hedge against periods of food shortage and makes survival more likely during times of famine. But in our modern world, access to food is no longer a problem for millions of people. The food supply is stable, and large amounts of energy-dense foods are readily available. Not surprisingly, most of us are getting heavier. For some people, the problem becomes even more extreme and results in obesity. Con- sidered in this way, obesity can be regarded as a state of excessive, chronic fat storage (Berthoud & Morrison, 2008). Worldwide, obesity is now a major public health problem. From 1980 to 2002 the prevalence of obesity almost tripled in adults in the United Kingdom. In China, rates of obesity in preschool children were 1.5 percent in 1989 and 12.6 percent just 9 years later (Flegal et al., 2002). The most recent estimates show that one-third of adults in the United States are obese (Flegal et al., 2010). Figure 9.5 on page 316 shows how much more prevalent obesity has become in the past two decades.  Medical Issues  Obesity brings with it increased risk for many health problems. These include high cholesterol, hypertension, heart disease, arthritis, diabetes, and cancer (Malnick & Knobler, 2006). It has been estimated that, by 2030, the cost of treating these prob- lems in the United States alone will exceed 850 billion dollars
  annually (Wang et al., 2008). In addition, people who are obese have a reduced life expectancy of 5 to 20 years (Fontaine et al., 2003). It should therefore come as no surprise that the World Health Organization has recognized obesity as one of the top 10 global health problems.  Definition and Prevalence  Obesity   is defined on the basis of a statistic called the   body mass index (BMI) . This is a measure of a person’s weight relative to height and is calculated using the formula shown in Table 9.4 on page 310. Generally speaking, people with a BMI below 18.5 are considered underweight; 18.5 to 24.9 is considered normal; 25.0 to 29.9 is overweight; and obesity is defined as having a BMI above 30. Having a BMI above 40 or being more than 100 pounds overweight is called morbid obesity. This is the point at which excess weight begins to interfere with basic activities such as walking and creates many health problems. Table 9.5 shows current prevalence rates of overweight and obesity for different groups of adults in the United States. As you can see, the majority of us (68.3%) weigh more than we should. But ethnicity is also very important. Obesity is more prevalent in ethnic minorities. In general, rates of obesity are slightly higher in men than they are in women. The notable exception here involves African Americans. One in every two black women is obese. This is the highest rate of obesity found for any group (Flegal et al., 2010). Another demographic variable linked to obesity is social class, although again gender and ethnicity are important. Higher income women are much less likely to be obese than lower income women. For black and Mexican American men, how- ever, the opposite is true; men with higher incomes are more likely to be obese.  Weight Stigma  People who are obese are often judged harshly by others. They are routinely ridiculed, discriminated against, and stigma- tized (Carr & Friedman, 2005). A powerful source of this is the media, which perpetuates weight-based stereotypes and often depicts overweight or obese people in a very negative light. Compared to thin television characters, those who are overweight or obese are more likely to be shown when eating, are less likely to be depicted as being involved in romantic relationships, and are more likely to be the target of derisive comments (see Schvey et al., 2011). Audiences also laugh more when negative comments are directed toward overweight characters, especially female ones. Weight bias is even found in health care professionals who may blame obese patients for being overweight and having weight-related health problems (Mold & Forbes, 2011). The World Around Us box describes  table   9.5  Prevalence (%) of Overweight and Obesity in U.S. Adults Group   Overweight   Obese  All   68.3   33.9 White   67.5   32.8 Hispanic   76.9   37.9 Mexican American   77.5   39.3 Black   73.7   44.1 Note: Figures based on BMI of 25 or above for overweight and 30 or above for obesity. Source: Flegal et al. (2010).  figure   9.5 Obesity has increased dramatically in the United States over the past 20 years.  Source : CDC.gov/obesity/trends.html  No Data  1990  1999 2009  < 10%   10%–14%   15%–19% 20%–24%   25%–29%   ≥ 30%
  some of the consequences that stigma has on people who are overweight. But being obese may not be the personal choice that many people believe it is. The more research progresses, the more we are learning about how important genes and other biological factors are in determining the drive to eat and the way our bod- ies respond when we eat less. We are also learning how power- ful environmental factors can be. In short, the idea that we can simply decide to control our weight by eating less and exercising more does not always fit with the scientific facts.  Obesity and the   DSM  From a diagnostic perspective, obesity is not an eating disorder, and it is not included in   DSM-5 . However, Volkow and O’Brien (2007) suggest that some forms of obesity are driven by an exces- sive motivational desire for food. They liken such symptoms as the compulsive consumption of food and the inability to restrain eating despite the wish to do so to symptoms of substance abuse and drug dependence. This parallels the view, offered by some, that obesity is a “food addiction” (see Cota et al., 2006). It has also been suggested that obesity and addiction may both concern problems in key brain regions involved in motivation, reward, and inhibitory control. Of course, the idea that obesity is a brain disorder is very controversial. Nonetheless, it does illustrate how much ideas about obesity are beginning to change.  in review  •   Why is the increase in the prevalence of obesity such a public health concern?  •   Explain the importance of the body mass index in the definition of obesity.  •   How are ethnicity, gender, and social class related to rates of obesity?  •   How do the media portray people who are overweight and obese? What are some of the consequences of this?  •   On what grounds is the argument being made that obesity might be a brain disorder? What effect might this have on stigma?  Risk and Causal Factors in Obesity  The role of Genes  Are you the kind of person who can eat high-calorie foods with- out significant weight gain? Or does it seem as though you need only to look at a piece of chocolate cake to gain a few pounds? In all probability our genetic makeup plays an important role in determining how predisposed we are to becoming obese in the modern environment of increased food availability. Some of the genes that may, in our ancestral past, have been advantageous and helped us survive in times of famine may predispose those who carry them to readily gain weight when food is plentiful. Interest- ingly, population groups that were most susceptible to starvation throughout history (e.g., Pima Indians, Pacific Islanders) are those that are most inclined to become obese when they have a sedentary lifestyle and a Western diet (see Friedman, 2003). Thinness seems to run in families (Bulik & Allison, 2002). Genes associated with thinness and leanness have been found in certain animals, and a special type of rat has now been bred that does not become obese even when fed a high-fat diet. Twin studies further suggest that genes play a role both in the develop- ment of obesity and in the tendency to binge (Bulik et al., 2003; Javaras et al., 2008).  the WorlD around us  Do Negative Messages About Being Overweight Encourage Overweight People to Eat More or Less?  I n our society many people still consider it acceptable to make fun of those who are overweight or obese. But what effect does this have on the people who receive such stigmatizing messages? To address this question Schvey and colleagues (2011) asked overweight and normal weight women to view one of two videos. One video depicted clips from neutral scenes such as insurance commercials. The other video contained clips from tele- visions shows and movies that depicted overweight and obese women in negative ways (e.g., as clumsy, lazy, and loud). After watching the videos, all the women were given questionnaires to complete in private. The room also contained three different bowls of snack foods, which the women were invited to eat. The variable that the researchers were most interested in was how much the women ate after being exposed to the different types of films. After seeing the stigmatizing videos the over- weight women consumed 303 calories of snack food. This is more than three times as much as the 89 calories consumed by the overweight women who had watched the neutral film. The overweight women who had watched the stigmatizing vid- eos also ate significantly more calories than the normal-weight women who watched either type of film. Television is a powerful source of weight-based stereotypes. The average American watches around 150 hours of television a month. Far from motivating overweight and obese people to lose weight, the negatively biased portrayals of obesity that we routinely see on TV may actually lead people to eat more rather than less.
Indeed, a genetic mutation has been discovered that is specifically associated with binge eating (Branson et al., 2003). Although this mutation was found only in a minority (5%) of the obese people in the study, all of the obese people with the gene reported problems with binge eating. In contrast, only 14 percent of obese people who did not have the genetic muta- tion displayed a pattern of binge eating.  hormones Involved in Appetite and Weight regulation  In the course of a year, the average person will consume 1 mil- lion calories or more and yet keep a reasonably stable weight. How do we accomplish this? The answers lie in the remark- able ability of our bodies to regulate the daily quantity of food consumed and to balance this with our energy output over the longer term. This is relevant to the concept of set point that we described earlier. Remarkably, we are able to regulate our energy balance with a precision of more than 99.5 percent. This is far in excess of what we could monitor in any conscious or mindful way (Friedman, 2004). One key element of this homeostatic system is a hormone called   leptin . Leptin is produced by fat cells, and it acts to reduce our intake of food. Increased body fat leads to increased levels of leptin, which leads to decreased food intake. When body fat levels decrease, leptin production decreases and food intake is stimulated. Rare genetic mutations that result in an inability to produce leptin cause people to have an insatiable appetite and result in morbid obesity. One 9-year-old girl in England weighed 200 pounds. She could hardly walk because of her extreme weight. When it was discovered that she was lacking leptin, she was treated with injections of the hormone, and her weight consequently returned to normal (Farooqi et al., 2002; Montague et al., 1997). Unfortunately, when leptin is given to overweight individu- als, in the majority of cases it has little effect. People who are overweight generally have high levels of leptin in their blood- stream. The problem is that they are resistant to its effects. In fact, it has been suggested that obesity may result from a person’s being resistant to leptin (Friedman, 2004). Despite this compli- cation, the leptin system is still a major focus of interest in the search for antiobesity drugs. Why do we get hungry at regular times during the day even if we do not even see or smell food? The reason may lie in a hor- mone called   grehlin . Grehlin (the name comes from a Hindu word meaning “growth”) is a hormone that is produced by the stomach. It is a powerful appetite stimulator. Under normal circumstances, grehlin levels rise before a meal and fall after we have eaten. When grehlin is injected into human volunteers, it makes them very hungry. This suggests that grehlin is a key con- tributor to the appetite control system. People with a rare condition called Prader–Willi syndrome have chromosomal abnormalities that create many problems, one of which is very high levels of grehlin. Sufferers are extremely obese and often die before age 30 from obesity-related causes. The food cravings experienced by Prader–Willi sufferers can be so extreme that food has to be kept locked away so that they cannot binge. Although this genetic disorder is very unusual, findings such as this highlight the role of genetics in the regulation of eat- ing behavior and weight. They also illustrate how the biological drive to eat can be so powerful that willpower is no match for it.  Sociocultural Influences  The examples of Prader–Willi syndrome and mutations of the leptin gene tell us that genes alone can sometimes explain why people differ in their weight and eating patterns. However, in most cases environmental factors also play an important role. As with other disorders we have discussed in this book, a diathesis- stress perspective is most appropriate. Some of us, by virtue of our genetic makeup and personality, are likely to experience more weight-related problems from living in a culture that pro- vides ready access to high-fat, high-sugar (junk) foods, encour- ages overconsumption, and makes it easy to avoid exercise. Consider your own lifestyle issues. How often do you eat fast food? Are you more likely to take the stairs or the elevator? Even when we have good intentions, we sometimes make poor food choices or get too little exercise. A major culprit is time pressure. Because we are so chronically short of time, we drive rather than walk. We put food into our mouths far too quickly, outpac- ing our natural feelings of fullness. This leads us to keep eating. Finally, as the pace of life gets faster, we have less time to prepare food. So we eat out more often or buy more prepackaged or fast food. Which of these behaviors do you recognize in yourself? As Brownell and his colleagues (Brownell, 2003; Gearhardt et al., 2011) have pointed out, the food industry is also highly skilled at getting us to maximize our food intake. Restaurants  This woman suffers from Prader–Willi syndrome, a rare genetic disorder that makes people insatiably hungry. After a year in a group home with rigid dietary rules, she lost 80 pounds.
in the United States serve large portions of foods that are engi- neered to be hyperpalatable (especially tasty and rewarding) because they contain so much sugar or fat. Some examples of commonly eaten foods are shown in Table 9.6. One comparison of the same fast-food chains and eateries in Philadelphia and Paris found that the average portion sizes in Paris were 25 percent smaller (Rozin et al., 2003). In addition, the culture of supersizing tempts us to buy more than we might choose to buy otherwise simply because it costs only a little bit more (Brownell, 2003). In several ballparks you can now buy an “all-you-can-eat” seat. The price includes unlimited hot dogs, nachos, peanuts, popcorn, and soft drinks. Ultra-processed foods that are high in sugar, fat, and salt may be capable of triggering an addictive process. When rats were given extended access to a “cafeteria” diet of foods such as chocolate, cheesecake, sausage, and bacon (as well as to standard rat chow), they rapidly gained weight. They also began to consume these foods almost exclusively, eating very little of the rat chow. What was especially noteworthy was that the rats with extended access to the cafeteria diet were also insensitive to cues that signaled the delivery of electric foot shocks. Even under conditions of punish- ment, these rats did not decrease their intake of the foods they desired (Johnson & Kenny, 2010). There was also evidence that extended access to the high-fat, high-sugar foods resulted in a down-regulation of activity in brain reward circuits, perhaps because the brain reward systems had been overstimulated by the excessive consumption of the palatable foods. If this is true, overconsumption of ultra-processed foods could contribute to the development and maintenance of compulsive eating because eating these foods becomes less and less rewarding over time and more and more food is required to obtain the same amount of “reward.” Consider also the issue of accessibility. Foods with low nutritional value (high fat, high sugar) are less expensive and also much easier to find than foods with high nutritional value. Next time you go to a gas station or go out to see a movie, look at the food choices that are available. How much healthy food is on offer? Is it easier to find an apple or a candy bar? Notice how easy it is to mindlessly pick up a cheap high-calorie item that provides little nutrition. If you like to snack in front of the TV you should also be aware of how powerful food advertising can be. Food advertising seems to trigger the kind of automatic and unconscious eating that is not related to being hungry. In one study, children ate 45 percent more after watching a TV cartoon that contained food advertisements than they did if the cartoon contained advertising for other products (Harris et al., 2009). Continued exposure to a culture that provides easy access to highly palatable foods, offers large portions, and bombards people with endless food advertisements may explain why rates of obesity increase in immigrants after they have lived in the United States for a while. Although recent immigrants are less likely to be overweight and obese than people born in the United States, after they have lived in the country for 10 years or longer they have a significant increase in their body mass index (Goel et al., 2004). This suggests that sociocultural factors are likely to be playing a major role. In addition to the emphasis on food,  An LA Dodgers fan carries four hot dogs, nachos, peanuts, and four so- das from the concessions area. Sitting in the popular all-you-can-eat area costs $40, in seats that used to cost $8.  Rats given extended access to high-fat, high-sugar foods quickly gain weight. They also show decreases in brain reward circuits. If food becomes less rewarding, this could potentially drive the development of com- pulsive eating.  table   9.6  Sugar and Fat in Traditional and hyperpalatable Foods Food   Portion Size   Type   Sugar (g)   Fat (g)  Apple   1 medium   T   19   0 Tomato   1 medium   T   3   0 Orange   1 cup, sections   T   17   0 Chicken breast   3 ounces   T   0   3 Coca-Cola   1 can   H   39   0 McDonald’s fries   1 medium   H   0   19 Dairy Queen   1 medium ice cream H   34   10 Note: T = traditional food; H = hyperpalatable food. Dairy Queen ice cream cone is chocolate flavor. Source: Gearhardt et al. (2011).
what other aspects of American culture do you think might be exerting an influence here?  Family Influences  Family behavior patterns may also play a role in the development of excessive eating and obesity. In some families, a high-fat, high- calorie diet (or an overemphasis on food) may lead to obesity in many or all family members, including the family pet. In other families, eating (or overeating) becomes a habitual means of alle- viating emotional distress or showing love (Musante et al., 1998). Children whose mothers smoked during pregnancy or whose mothers gained a lot of weight during the pregnancy are also at a higher risk of being overweight at age 3 (Gillman et al., 2008). Family attitudes toward food are important because their consequences are likely to remain with us for a long time. Obe- sity is related to the number and size of fat (adipose) cells in the body (Heymsfield et al., 1995). People who are obese have mark- edly more adipose cells than people of normal weight (Peeke & Chrousos, 1995). When obese people lose weight, the size of the cells is reduced but not their number. Some evidence suggests that the total number of adipose cells stays the same from child- hood onward (Crisp et al., 1970). It is possible that overfeeding infants and young children causes them to develop more adipose cells and may thus predis- pose them to weight problems in adulthood. Consistent with this, DiPietro and colleagues (1994) found that, in a 40-year follow-up study, the majority of a sample of 504 overweight children became overweight adults. Finally, there is some evidence that obesity might be “socially contagious.” Provocative research findings have shown that if someone close to us (e.g., a spouse, sibling, or friend) becomes obese, the chance that we ourselves will later become obese can increase by as much as 57 percent. The effect is most marked within same-sex versus opposite-sex relationships, sug- gesting that social influences might be playing a key role. In contrast, weight gain in neighbors was not associated with later weight gain in those who lived close by, again suggesting that it is the closeness of the relationship, rather than exposure to common environmental factors, that might be important (Christakis & Fowler, 2007). Although the mechanisms of this social trans- mission are far from clear, it is possible that obesity in our close friends and family members could lead us to change our atti- tudes about weight or perhaps influences our eating patterns.  Stress and “Comfort Food”  Do you eat when you are stressed or unhappy? If you do, what kinds of food do you crave? Foods that are high in fat or carbo- hydrates are the foods that console most of us when we are feel- ing troubled (Canetti et al., 2002). Workers who say that they are under a lot of stress report that they eat less healthy foods, and foods that are higher in fat, relative to their less stressed counterparts (Ng & Jeffery, 2003). Eating for comfort is found in rats too. When rats were placed under chronic stress (being subjected to cold tempera- tures), they selected diets that were higher in fat and sugar (Dallman et al., 2003). What is also interesting in this study is that the rats that ate the comfort food gained weight in their bellies and became calmer in the face of new acute stress. This prompted the researchers to speculate that the sugary and fatty foods helped to reduce activation in the stress response system. Might overeating function as a means of reducing feelings of distress or depression? Certainly many people with obesity experience psychological problems such as depression. In a large community sample of more than 40,000 people, lifetime rates of mood disorders were higher in people who were obese than in people whose weight was in the normal range (Petry et al., 2008). Other research has found that a striking percentage of people with an eating disorder binge eat in response to aversive emotional states, such as feeling depressed or anxious (Kenardy et al., 1996).  Food advertising leads us to eat more even when we are not hungry. In one study, children ate 45 percent more when they watched a cartoon that contained food advertising.   Research suggests that obesity can be socially contagious. If someone close to us becomes obese, the chance that we will later become obese can increase by as much as 57 percent.
In light of Dallman’s data on the stressed rats, it is easy to grasp how weight gain (or a tendency to maintain excessive weight) may be explained quite simply in terms of learning prin- ciples. We are all conditioned to eat in response to a wide range of environmental stimuli (at parties, during movies, while watch- ing TV). Obese individuals have been shown to be conditioned to more cues—both internal and external—than others of nor- mal weight. Anxiety, anger, boredom, and depression may lead to overeating. Eating in response to such cues is then reinforced because the taste of good food is pleasurable and because the individual’s emotional tension is reduced.  Pathways to Obesity  Understanding the causes of obesity is complex. In all probability, obesity results from a combination of genetic, environmental, and sociocultural influences. An important step along the pathway to obesity, however, may be binge eating. In a prospective study of 231 adolescent girls, Stice, Presnell, and Spangler (2002) estab- lished that binge eating is a predictor of later obesity. This suggests that we should pay close attention to the causes of binge eating. Animal studies show that, in rats, any genetic differences that exist in the tendency to binge eat only start to emerge dur- ing puberty (Klump et al., 2011). Biological risk factors may thus become more important as we enter adolescence. Unfortu- nately, this is also the developmental period when sociocultural pressures may be most intense. Relevant here is research suggesting that one pathway to binge eating may be through social pressure to conform to the thin ideal, as ironic as this may seem (Stice et al., 2002). Being heavy often leads to dieting, which may lead to binge eating when willpower wanes (see Figure 9.6). Another pathway to binge eating may operate through depression and low self- esteem. In Stice and colleagues’ (2002) prospective study, low levels of support from peers, as well as depression, made girls more at risk for binging. We further have confirmation that when children are overweight, they are more likely to be rejected by their peers (Latner & Stunkard, 2003; Strauss & Pollack, 2003), consequently increasing their negative affect. As Figure 9.6 shows, a pattern of binge eating in response to negative emo- tions may make a bad situation much worse—increasing weight, depression, and fostering alienation from peers in a vicious cycle.  in review  •   What role do genetic factors play in obesity?  •   How do hormones such as leptin and grehlin help regulate appetite?  •   In what ways might negative emotional states contribute to the development of obesity?  •   In what ways is the food industry implicated in the obesity epidemic?  •   Why is understanding binge eating important for understanding obesity?  Treatment of Obesity  There are three main treatment options for people who are over- weight or obese. These are (1) lifestyle modifications (diet, exer- cise, and behavior therapy), (2) medications, and (3) bariatric surgery.  lifestyle Modifications  A first step in the treatment of obesity is a clinical approach that, ideally, involves a low-calorie diet, exercise, and some form of behavioral intervention. Several research trials have now dem- onstrated that lifestyle modification approaches yield positive benefits for patients, although the results are far from dramatic. Sustained weight loss of around 7 pounds (3.2 kilograms) is quite typical (Powell et al., 2007). However, it is important to keep in mind that for people who are overweight, even small amounts of weight loss may yield some health benefits. Using  Social pressure to be thin Dieting Diet failure Body dissatisfaction Binge eating Negative emotions Weight gain Binge eating  (A) (B)  figure   9.6  Pathways to Obesity.   One pathway to obesity is through social pressures to be thin. Another pathway may operate via depression and low self-esteem.
meal-replacement products (e.g., calorie-controlled shakes), con- tinuing a relationship with a treatment provider, and maintaining a high level of physical activity all help improve efforts at long- term weight control (Fabricatore & Wadden, 2006). What about popular diets? Gardner and colleagues (2007) compared the Atkins diet, the Zone diet, the Ornish diet, and a more traditional diet approach in a sample of overweight and obese women aged 25 to 50. At the end of a year, those who had followed the Atkins diet had lost the most weight (10.4 pounds or 4.7 kilograms) compared with a weight loss of 3.5 pounds (1.6 kilograms) for the Zone, 5.7 pounds (2.6 kilograms) for the Ornish, and 4.8 pounds (2.2 kilograms) for the traditional approach. Nonetheless, even for the most successful dieters, the amount of weight loss was not especially large. Weight Watchers is the only commercial weight-loss pro- gram with demonstrated efficacy in a randomized controlled trial. Over the course of 6 months, overweight and obese people who attended Weight Watchers lost more weight (10.5 versus 3 pounds) than did people who received self-help materials and two brief sessions with a nutritionist (Heshka et al., 2000). At a later follow-up, those who had attended Weight Watchers were still doing better than the people who had been assigned to the self-help group (Heshka et al., 2003). “Crash” diets and extreme treatments to bring about dra- matic weight loss (including starvation of patients in a hospital setting) are now considered to be outmoded and ineffective approaches. Although they lead to weight loss in the short term, the weight loss is not maintained. Indeed, at follow-up, people who have been subjected to these procedures usually weigh more than they did before the treatment started (Mann et al., 2007). Although we may be tempted by every new diet or weight loss fad that comes along, in the long run it is the calories that matter. Recent research has shown that focusing on the proportion of fat, protein, or carbohydrates in the diet is far less important than just eating less (Sacks et al., 2009). If you are able to do this, regardless of what kind of diet you chose, you will have some success. But the harsh reality is that losing weight is difficult for most people. And for those who are obese, losing weight and maintaining the weight loss present a truly formidable challenge. As we mentioned earlier, our bodies try to defend a set-point weight. When we try to go below this, marked metabolic and hormonal changes occur. The body goes into “starvation mode” and hunger is increased, the metabolic rate slows, and we also feel less full after eating (Goldsmith et al., 2010). It is also the case that energy expenditure decreases significantly following weight loss. This means that if an obese person loses 100 pounds, decreasing in weight from 300 pounds to 200 pounds, the person has to consume far fewer calories to maintain this new weight than a person who already weighed 200 pounds would (Friedman, 2004). It is hardly surprising, therefore, that relapse rates are so high after weight loss and that people who attempt to lose weight often feel so discouraged. Indeed, some researchers now maintain that obesity is resistant to psychological methods of treatment (Cooper et al., 2010). This makes prevention all the more important.  Medications  Drugs that are used to promote weight loss fall into two main categories. One group of medications reduces eating by sup- pressing appetite, typically by increasing the availability of neurotransmitters. A second group of medications works by pre- venting some of the nutrients in food from being absorbed. Two medications are approved by the FDA for use in con- junction with a reduced-calorie diet. Sibutramine (Meridia) inhibits the reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine and, to a lesser extent, dopamine. Orlistat (Xenical) works by reducing the amount of fat in the diet that can be absorbed once it enters the gut. Both medications provide modest clinical benefits and lead to more weight loss than placebo (Fabricatore & Wadden, 2006). In some cases, however, the differences are not especially impres- sive. Patients who take Orlistat for 1 year lose approximately 9 percent of their pretreatment weight. The weight loss for con- trols who take a placebo medication during this time is just under 6 percent (Heck et al., 2000; Yanovski & Yanovski, 2002). In addition to specific weight loss drugs, recent research suggests that two medications routinely used in psychiatry and addiction medicine might also be helpful. The 1,742 obese par- ticipants with a BMI between 30 and 45 were randomly assigned to receive a higher or lower dose of naltrexone combined with another drug called bupropion. A third group received a placebo. Only about half of the participants completed the treatment. However, the results showed that both drug treatment groups lost more weight over the course of the following year than did people in the placebo group (Greenway et al., 2010). These results are comparable to those associated with weight loss medi- cations like Orlistat. Also, because naltrexone and bupropion act on the midbrain dopamine system, they provide some support for the growing conceptualization of obesity as an addiction.  Bariatric Surgery  Bariatric or gastric bypass surgery is the most effective long- term treatment for people who are morbidly obese (Bult et al., 2008; Moldovan & David, 2011). Several different  Sustained weight loss of around 7 pounds is typical for people who exercise and reduce their intake of calories. Even modest weight loss can lead to health benefits.
techniques can be used both to reduce the storage capacity of the stomach and, sometimes, to shorten the length of the intestine so that less food can be absorbed. Before the opera- tion, the stomach might be able to hold about a quart of food and liquid. After the procedure, the stomach might be able to hold only the contents of a shot glass. Binge eating becomes virtually impossible. The operation takes only a few hours, but because it is performed on an obese patient, recovery can be difficult. Surgical treatment of obesity tends to result in substantial weight loss, averaging between 44 and 88 pounds (Bult et al., 2008). Interestingly, levels of the appetite hormone grehlin are also suppressed after particular types of surgical procedures. Of course, some patients manage to find ways to continue to binge eat after surgery (Kalarchian et al., 1998) and tend to regain their weight over an 18-month period (Hsu et al., 1998). Although bariatric surgery is not without risk (mortality rates hover around 1%), the risk of the surgery should be evalu- ated against the health risks that accompany untreated obesity. The case study below describes a successful outcome from the procedure.  People Hardly Recognize Him   Stanley’s weight problems began when he was 19. He gained weight and then kept on gaining. A big man with a fun-loving personality, he tried dieting from time to time. But nothing really worked for him. Part of the problem was that he hated to exercise. By the time he was 59 years old he weighed close to 400lbs. He had mobility issues. He also had diabetes. Stanley knew he had to do something. Although he was comfortable with who he was, he was concerned about the impact his obesity was having on his health and long-term longevity. His doctor recommended gastric bypass surgery. Stanley agreed. There was much to be done before the surgery itself. To ensure that he was physically able to cope with the pro- cedure, Stanley was evaluated by a staff physician. Other members of the team included a dietician, who explained the many changes Stanley would need to make before and after the surgery. A psychologist also explored Stanley’s readiness to commit to what was ahead. Finally, Stanley’s surgeon carefully explained the details of the procedure and what would be involved. Stanley was then placed on a diet and told to lose weight before a surgery date could be arranged. On the day of the surgery, Stanley arrived – already 13lbs lighter as a result of following the prescribed diet. Then, during a procedure that lasted 5 hours, part of Stanley’s stomach was permanently closed off with staples. His stomach was reduced from the size of a football to the size of an egg. In addition, a piece of his intestine was re-routed so that food from the newly-created stom- ach pouch by-passed the early sections of the intestines (where nutrients and calories are typically absorbed after eating). Following the surgery, Stanley spent 5 days in the hos- pital recovering. Almost immediately after the surgery, Stanley’s diabetes disappeared. He was put on a liquid diet for the first few weeks and told to drink a lot of water. Then he graduated to eating soft foods like boiled eggs. Eventually, he began to eat more normal foods, although Stanley was surprised by how little he could actually tolerate. Now, one year after the surgery, Stanley still has to be care- ful about what he eats. Carbonated beverages and spicy foods no longer agree with him and he has become intolerant of lac- tose. The amount of food he can eat without discomfort is very small. But Stanley has already lost 140lbs and he is still losing weight. He talks about a fellow patient who had the same pro- cedure. “He was telling me that he had figured out a way to get around the eating restrictions,” says Stanley. “I don’t get it. Why would anyone go through this procedure and then do that?” In contrast, Stanley feels that the gastric bypass he received has given him a tremendous opportunity. He feels better. He has more energy. And he knows he has improved his chances of liv- ing a longer life. He is especially amused when people he knows hardly recognize him. “I like that,” he says.  The Importance of Prevention  Reducing the prevalence of obesity is now a top priority. But if obesity is to be prevented, it must first be recognized. Astonish- ingly, in a recent study conducted in Finland, 57 percent of  Al Roker, the NBC weatherman on the   Today   show, had gastric bypass surgery, one form of bariatric surgery. He weighed 320 pounds at the time of his surgery. A year later, Roker had shed 100 pounds.
parents who had an overweight or obese 7-year-old child failed to recognize that their child was overweight (Vanhala et al., 2009). In this Finnish study, childhood obesity was predicted by having an obese parent, skipping breakfast, habitual overeating, and not being physically active. Because we know that childhood obesity predicts adult obesity, parental education is clearly very important. Losing weight is difficult because it is a battle against biologi- cal mechanisms designed to keep us at our current weight. This highlights the importance of not gaining weight in the first place. Over an 8-year period, the average adult (in the 20–40 age range) will gain about 14 to 16 pounds (Hill et al., 2003). How may this be avoided? Most of the weight gain that people often regard as inevitable could be prevented through a combination of increased energy expenditure and reduced food intake. And this may be easier to do than we might imagine. Hill and colleagues (2003) have calculated that all that we need to do is cut back on our intake of calories by a mere 100 calories per day or walk an extra mile each day. Here are some simple ways to accomplish this:  • Eat three fewer bites of food when you eat a meal. Three  bites of hamburger, for example, equal 100 calories.  • Take the stairs, combine a meeting with a walk, or park a  little farther from your destination. A mile of walking is only 2,000 to 2,500 extra steps, and we can add these in small increments throughout the day.  • Sleep more. Research is showing that babies who sleep fewer  than 12 hours a day are more likely to be overweight at age 3 (Taveras et al., 2008). And adults who sleep only 5 to 6 hours a night gain more weight over time than those who sleep 7 to 8 hours a night (Chaput et al., 2008). By making these habits part of your daily routine, you will be able to prevent weight gain as you age, improving your overall health.  in review  •   Why is losing weight so difficult for most people?  •   What is the most effective treatment for people who are morbidly obese?  •   What are the elements of a lifestyle modification treatment for obesity?  •   What social policy changes might reduce or prevent obesity? It has been estimated that increasing the tax on sugar-sweetened beverages by 20 percent could lead to an average weight loss of almost 4 pounds a year for adults.  UnreSolveD issues  The Role of Public Policy in the Prevention of Obesity  T he prevalence of childhood obesity has tripled since 1980. Almost 32 percent of children and teens are now overweight or obese (Weir, 2012). Once people become obese, treatment is very difficult. Preventing obesity, both in children and adults, is therefore a major priority. At the national level the problem of obesity is unlikely to be solved without changes in public policy. We are all aware that rates of lung cancer have decreased as a result of increased taxes on cigarettes. Can we reduce obesity by changing the en- vironmental conditions that encourage unhealthy eating or limit physical activity? And are we, as a society, ready for this? In 2008, much to the dismay of the restaurant industry, New York City became the first place to require chain restaurants to post calorie information on their menu boards. This was an im- portant move because most people consistently underestimate the calories in the food they eat outside the home. A recent study also suggests that when people order from a menu that includes calorie information, they consume 14 percent fewer calories than people who order from a menu that contains no calorie information (Roberto et al., 2010). Even more recently, the New York Board of Health voted to ban the sale of sugary drinks over 16 ounces in size. Although many medical profes- sionals applauded this ban, others were angry that their choices were being limited. The ban is now a focus of legal action and is not yet in effect. Children consume 35 to 50 percent of their daily calories while they are at school. Many of these calories come from foods purchased from vending machines, school stores, or a la carte cafeteria offerings (Weir, 2012). However, this may soon change. In 2010 Congress passed the Healthy, Hunger-free Kids Act. This puts in place new policies for food in schools via the School Lunch Program. The new law will also require the development
9.1   What are the clinical aspects of eating disorders?  •   Included in   DSM-5   are three different eating disorders: anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating disorder. Binge eating disorder is a new disorder that was officially recognized for the first time in   DSM-5 .  •   Both anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are characterized by an intense fear of becoming fat and by a drive for thinness. Patients with anorexia nervosa are severely underweight. This is not true of patients with bulimia nervosa.  •   Eating disorders are more common in women than in men (3:1 ratio). They can develop at any age, although they typically emerge in adolescence or early adulthood. Anorexia nervosa usually begins at an earlier age (15–19) than bulimia nervosa (20–24).  •   Anorexia nervosa has a lifetime prevalence of approximately 0.9 percent in women and 0.3 percent in men. Bulimia nervosa is more common, with a lifetime prevalence of 1.5 percent in women and 0.5 percent in men. Binge eating disorder is the most common eating disorder with a prevalence of 3.5 percent in women and 2.0 percent in men. Many more people suffer from less severe forms of disturbed eating patterns  9.2   What are the risk and causal factors for eating disorders?  •   Genetic factors play an important role in eating disorders. Genes may make some people more susceptible to binge eating or to sociocultural influences, or may underlie personality styles (e.g., perfectionism) that increase risk for eating disorders.  •   The neurotransmitter serotonin has been implicated in eating disorders. This neurotransmitter is also involved in mood disorders, which are highly comorbid with eating disorders.  •   Sociocultural influences are integral in the development of eating disorders. Our society places great value on being thin. Western values concerning thinness may be spreading. This may help explain why eating disorders are now found throughout the world.  •   Individual risk factors such as internalizing the thin ideal, body dissatisfaction, dieting, negative affect, and perfectionism have been implicated in the development of eating disorders.  9.3   how are eating disorders treated?  •   Anorexia nervosa is very difficult to treat. Treatment is long term, and many patients resist getting well. For younger patients, family therapy appears to be very beneficial. Olanzapine is also helpful.  •   The treatment of choice for bulimia nervosa is CBT. CBT is also helpful for binge-eating disorder. Interpersonal therapy (IPT) seems to be helpful for binge eating disorder and may be espe- cially acceptable to minorities.  9.4   how do we define obesity and why is it a worldwide problem?  •   Obesity is defined as having a body mass index of 30 or above. Obesity is associated with many medical problems and increased mortality. Obesity is not currently viewed as an eating disorder or as a psychiatric condition in the   DSM .  9.5   Who is most at risk for obesity?  •   A tendency toward being thin or heavy may be inherited. Our genetic makeup may make us more or less likely to gain weight in a cultural environment that promotes overconsumption of food and a sedentary lifestyle.  •   Minorities are at especially high risk for obesity. Obesity rates are highest (50 percent) in black women. Low income is associated with obesity for women, but higher income is associated with obesity in black and Mexican American men.  9   summary  of nutritional standards for all of the foods sold in schools. This could be very beneficial. Evidence suggests that children who live in states where there are stringent laws governing the sale of junk food gain less weight between the fifth and eighth grades than those who live in states with more lax soda and snack food regulations (Taber et al., 2012). In California, some cities have even passed ordinances requiring children’s restaurant meals to meet certain nutritional standards if a toy is to be included in the meal. However, McDonald’s has simply responded by charging an extra 10 cents for the toy rather than changing the nutritional content of the “Happy Meal.” Other approaches that have been suggested include improv- ing opportunities for physical activity, better regulation of food advertising aimed at children, subsidizing the sale of healthful foods, and increasing taxes on sugar-sweetened beverages like soda (Gearhardt et al., 2012; Novak & Brownell, 2011). Needless to say, many of these ideas are be- ing strenuously opposed by some citizen’s groups and by the food industry. What do you think? Have you seen calorie information on menus? Did it effect what you decided to order? Is being able to buy a supersized beverage important to you? Do you support increased taxes on unhealthy foods? What do you think needs to be done to stop the nationwide problem of obesity from esca- lating even further out of control?
9.6   how is obesity treated?  •   Obesity is a chronic problem. Lifestyle modifications and medications help patients to lose small amounts of weight. Drastic weight loss, however, usually requires bariatric surgery.  •   Because obesity tends to be a lifelong problem and because treating obesity is so difficult, there is now a focus on try- ing to prevent people from becoming obese in the first place. Implementing many of the approaches that have been recom- mended will require changes in social policy.  key terms  anorexia nervosa   295  binge   296  binge eating disorder (BED)  298  body mass index (BMI)   316  bulimia nervosa   297  cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)   313  eating disorder   294  grehlin   318  hypothalamus   307  leptin   318  negative affect   311  obesity   316  perfectionism   310  purge   296  serotonin   307  set point   307
learning objectives  10.1  What are some of the general features of personality disorders?  10.2  What are some of the difficulties of doing research on personality disorders?  10.3  What characteristics do the Cluster A personality disorders have in common?  10.4  What characteristics do the Cluster B personality disorders have in common?  10.5  What characteristics do the Cluster C personality disorders have in common?  10.6  What are the clinical features of borderline personality disorder and how is this disorder treated?  10.7  What are the features of antisocial personality disorder and psychopathy?  A person’s broadly characteristic traits, coping styles, and ways of interacting in the social environment emerge during childhood and normally crystallize into established patterns by the end of adolescence or early adulthood. These patterns constitute the individual’s   personality —the set of unique traits and behaviors that characterize the individual. Today there is reasonably broad agreement among personality researchers that about five basic personality trait dimensions can be used to characterize normal personality. This five-factor model of personality traits includes the following five trait dimensions: neuroticism, extraversion/ introversion, openness to experience, agreeableness/antagonism, and conscientiousness (e.g., Goldberg, 1990; John & Naumann, 2008; McCrae & Costa, 2008).  Clinical Features of Personality Disorders  For most of us, our adult personality is attuned to the demands of society. In other words, we readily comply with most societal expectations. In contrast, there are certain people who, although they do not necessarily display obvious symptoms of most of the disorders discussed in this book, nevertheless have certain traits that are so inflexible and maladaptive that they are unable to perform adequately at least some of the varied roles expected of them by their society, in which case we may say that they have a  personality disorder   (formerly known as a   character disorder ). Two of the general features that characterize most personality disorders are chronic interpersonal difficulties and problems with one’s identity or sense of self (Livesley, 2001). In the case below, many of the varied characteristics of someone with a personality disorder are illustrated.  Narcissistic Personality Disorder   Bob, age 21, comes to the psychiatrist’s office accompanied by his parents. He begins the interview by announcing he has no problems. . . . The psychiatrist was able to obtain the following story from Bob and his parents. Bob had apparently spread malicious and false rumors about several of the teachers who had given him poor grades, implying that they were having homosexual affairs with students. This, as well as increasingly erratic attendance at his classes over the past term, following the loss of a girlfriend, prompted the school counselor to suggest to Bob and his par- ents that help was urgently needed. Bob claimed that his aca- demic problems were exaggerated, his success in theatrical pro- ductions was being overlooked, and he was in full control of the situation. He did not deny that he spread the false rumors but showed no remorse or apprehension about possible repercus- sions for himself. Bob is a tall, stylishly dressed young man. His manner is dis- tant but charming . . . . However, he assumes a condescending, cynical, and bemused manner toward the psychiatrist and the evaluation process. He conveys a sense of superiority and control over the evaluation. . . . His mother . . . described Bob as hav- ing been a beautiful, joyful baby who was gifted and brilliant. The father . . . noted that Bob had become progressively more resentful with the births of his two siblings. The father laugh- ingly commented that Bob “would have liked to have been the only child.” . . . In his early school years, Bob seemed to play and interact less with other children than most others do. In fifth grade, after a change in teachers, he became arrogant and withdrawn and refused to participate in class. Nevertheless, he maintained excellent grades. . . . It became clear that Bob had never been “one of the boys.” . . . When asked, he professed to take pride in “being different” from his peers. . . . Though he was well known to classmates, the relationships he had with them were generally under circumstances in which he was looked up to for his intellectual or dramatic talents. Bob conceded that others viewed him as cold or insensitive . . . but he dismissed this as unimportant. This represented strength to him. He went on to note that when others complained about these qualities in him, it was largely because of their own weakness. In his view, they envied him and longed to have him care about them. He believed they sought to gain by having an association with him.  10
Source: Adapted with permission from   DSM-IV-TR Casebook: A Learning Companion to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,  Fourth Edition,   Text Revision   (pp. 239–41) (Copyright © 2002), Washington, DC. American Psychiatric Association.  According to general   DSM-5   criteria for diagnosing a per- sonality disorder, the person’s enduring pattern of behavior must be   pervasive   and   inflexible , as well as   stable   and of   long duration . It must also cause either   clinically significant distress   or   impair- ment in functioning   and be manifested in at least two of the fol- lowing areas: cognition, affectivity, interpersonal functioning, or impulse control. From a clinical standpoint, people with person- ality disorders often cause at least as much difficulty in the lives of others as they do in their own lives. Other people tend to find the behavior of individuals with personality disorders confusing, exasperating, unpredictable, and, to varying degrees, unaccept- able. Whatever the particular trait patterns affected individuals have developed (obstinacy, covert hostility, suspiciousness, or fear of rejection, for example), these patterns color their reac- tions to each new situation and lead to a repetition of the same maladaptive behaviors because they do not learn from previous mistakes or troubles. For example, a dependent person may wear out a relationship with someone such as a spouse by incessant and extraordinary demands such as never being left alone. After that partner leaves, the person may go almost immediately into another equally dependent relationship without choosing the new partner carefully. Personality disorders typically do not stem from debilitating reactions to stress in the recent past, as do posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) or many cases of major depression. Rather, these disorders stem largely from the gradual development of inflexible and distorted personality and behavioral patterns that result in persistently maladaptive ways of perceiving, thinking about, and relating to the world. In many cases, major stressful life events early in life help set the stage for the development of these inflexible and distorted personality patterns. The category of personality disorders is broad, encompassing behavioral problems that differ greatly in form and severity. In the milder cases we find people who generally function adequately but who would be described by their relatives, friends, or associates as troublesome, eccentric, or hard to get to know. Like Bob, they may have difficulties developing close relationships with others or getting along with those with whom they do have close relation- ships. One severe form of personality disorder ( antisocial personality disorder ) results in extreme and often unethical “acting out” against society. Many such individuals are incarcerated in prisons, although some are able to manipulate others and keep from getting caught. The   DSM-5   personality disorders are grouped into three clus- ters. These were derived on the basis of what were originally thought to be important similarities of features among the disorders within a given cluster. Table 10.1 on page 333 provides a summary.  •   Cluster A:   Includes paranoid, schizoid, and schizotypal per- sonality disorders.   People with these disorders often seem odd or eccentric, with unusual behavior ranging from dis- trust and suspiciousness to social detachment.  •   Cluster B:   Includes histrionic, narcissistic, antisocial, and borderline personality disorders.   Individuals with these disor- ders share a tendency to be dramatic, emotional, and erratic.  •   Cluster C:   Includes avoidant, dependent, and obsessive- compulsive personality disorders.   In contrast to the other two clusters, people with these disorders often show anxiety and fearfulness. Personality disorders first appeared in the   DSM   in 1980 (in   DSM - III ). Although the use of clusters has continued since then, research has raised many questions about their valid- ity. As will be discussed later in this chapter (see “Unresolved Issues”), there are substantial limitations to the category and cluster designations. Indeed, several proposals carefully consid- ered by the   DSM-5   task force were to remove four personality disorders entirely and abandon the cluster organization. One of the primary issues is that there are simply too many overlapping features across both categories and clusters (Krueger & Eaton, 2010; Sheets & Craighead, 2007; Widiger & Mullins-Sweatt, 2005). Nevertheless, because much of the research literature to date has used these clusters as an organizing rubric in one way or another, we still mention them here. There is not as much evidence for the prevalence of personality disorders as there is for most of the other disorders discussed in this book, in part because there has never been a really large   epidemiological study   comprehensively examining all the personality disorders the way the two National Comorbidity Surveys examined the other disorders we have discussed (Kessler et al., 1994; Kessler, Berglund, Demler et al., 2005b). Neverthe- less, a handful of epidemiological studies in recent years have assessed the prevalence of the personality disorders, albeit with differing conclusions (Lenzenweger, 2008; Paris, 2010). How- ever, prevalence estimates for one or more personality disorders have ranged from 4.4 to 14.8 percent (Grant et al., 2005; Lenzenweger, 2008; Paris, 2010). Such discrepancies are likely due to problematic diagnostic criteria, which will be discussed later in this chapter. One review averaging across six relatively small epidemiological studies estimated that about 13 percent of the population meets criteria for at least one personality disorder at some point in their lives (Mattia & Zimmerman,  research close-up  Epidemiological Study  Epidemiological studies are designed to establish the preva- lence (number of cases) of a particular disorder in a very large sample (usually many thousands) of people living in the community.
2001; see also Weissman, 1993). Several studies from Sweden yielded very similar estimates (Ekselius et al., 2001; Torgersen et al., 2001, 2012). In addition, a very large subset of people in the NCS-Replication received a modified personality disorders interview that allowed assessment of the prevalence of Cluster A, B, and C personality disorders but only two specific personality disorders (Lenzenweger et al., 2007). This study estimated that about 10 percent of the population exhibits at least one personal- ity disorder, with 5.7 percent in Cluster A, 1.5 percent in Clus- ter B, and 6 percent in Cluster C. Due to the high comorbidity between clusters, some individuals meet criteria for personality disorders in more than one cluster, so the percent of people in each cluster adds up to more than 10 percent. Since their entry into the   DSM   in 1980, the personality disorders have been coded on a separate axis, Axis II. This was because they were regarded as different enough from the stan- dard psychiatric syndromes (which were coded on Axis I) to war- rant separate classification. However, in   DSM-5 , the multiaxial system was abandoned. Personality disorders are now included with the rest of the disorders we discuss in this textbook. Person- ality disorders are often associated with (or comorbid with) anxi- ety disorders (Chapters 5 and 6), mood disorders (Chapter 7), substance use problems ( 1), and sexual deviations ( 2). (See, for example, L. A. Clark, 2005, 2007; Grant, Hasin et al., 2005; Grant, Stinson et al., 2005; Links et al., 2012; Mattia & Zimmerman, 2001) One summary of evidence estimated that about three-quarters of people diagnosed with a personality disorder also have another disorder as well (Dolan-Sewell et al., 2001).  in review  •   What is the definition of a personality disorder?  •   What are the general   DSM   criteria for diagnosing personality disorders?  Difficulties Doing Research on Personality Disorders  Before we discuss the clinical features and causes of personality disorders, we should note that several important aspects of doing research in this area have hindered progress relative to what is known about many other disorders. Two major categories of difficulties are briefly described.  Difficulties in Diagnosing Personality Disorders  A special caution is in order regarding the diagnosis of personal- ity disorders because more misdiagnoses probably occur here than in any other category of disorder. There are a number of reasons for this. One problem is that diagnostic criteria for per- sonality disorders are not as sharply defined as they are for most other diagnostic categories, so they are often not very precise or easy to follow in practice. For example, it may be difficult to diagnose reliably whether someone meets a given criterion for dependent personality disorder such as “goes to excessive lengths to obtain nurturance and support from others” or “has diffi- culty making everyday decisions without an excessive amount of advice and reassurance from others.” Because the criteria for personality disorders are defined by inferred traits or consistent patterns of behavior rather than by more objective behavioral standards (such as having a panic attack or a prolonged and persistent depressed mood), the clinician must exercise more judgment in making the diagnosis than is the case for many other disorders. With the development of semistructured interviews and self-report inventories for the diagnosis of personality disorders, certain aspects of diagnostic reliability increased substantially. However, because the agreement between the diagnoses made on the basis of different structured interviews or self-report invento- ries is often rather low, there are still substantial problems with the reliability and validity of these diagnoses (Clark & Harrison, 2001; Livesley, 2003; Trull & Durrett, 2005). This means, for example, that three different researchers using three different assessment instruments may identify groups of individuals with substantially different characteristics as having a particular diag- nosis such as borderline or narcissistic personality disorder. Of course, this virtually ensures that few obtained research results will be replicated by other researchers even though the groups studied by the different researchers have the same diagnostic label (e.g., Clark & Harrison, 2001). Given problems with the unreliability of diagnoses (e.g., Clark, 2007; Livesley, 2003; Trull & Durrett, 2005), a great deal of work over the past 20 years has been directed toward devel- oping a more reliable and accurate way of assessing personality disorders. Several theorists have attempted to deal with the prob- lems inherent in categorizing personality disorders by developing dimensional systems of assessment for the symptoms and traits involved in personality disorders (e.g., Clark, 2007; Krueger & Eaton, 2010; Trull & Durrett, 2005; Widiger et al., 2009). However, a unified dimensional classification of personality disorders has been slow to emerge, and a number of researchers have been trying to develop an approach that will integrate the many different existing approaches (e.g., Markon et al., 2005; Krueger, Eaton, Clark et al., 2011a; Widiger et al., 2009, 2012). The model that has perhaps been most influential is the five-factor model. This builds on the five-factor model of normal personality mentioned earlier to help researchers understand the commonalities and distinctions among the different personal- ity disorders by assessing how these individuals score on the five basic personality traits (e.g., Clark, 2007; Widiger & Trull, 2007; Widiger et al., 2009, 2012). To fully account for the myriad ways in which people differ, each of these five basic per- sonality traits also has subcomponents or facets. For example, the trait of neuroticism is comprised of the following six facets: anxi- ety, angry-hostility, depression, self-consciousness, impulsive- ness, and vulnerability. Different individuals who all have high
levels of neuroticism may vary widely in which facets are most prominent—for example, some might show more prominent anxious and depressive thoughts, others might show more self- consciousness and vulnerability, and yet others might show more angry-hostility and impulsivity. And the trait of extraversion is composed of the following six facets: warmth, gregariousness, assertiveness, activity, excitement seeking, and positive emotions. (All the facets of each of the five basic trait dimensions and how they differ across people with different personality disorders are explained in Table 10.2 on p. 335.) By assessing whether a per- son scores low, high, or somewhere in between on each of these 30 facets, it is easy to see how this system can account for an enormous range of different personality patterns—far more than the 10 personality disorders currently classified in the   DSM.  Within a dimensional approach, normal personality trait dimensions can be recast into corresponding domains that rep- resent more pathological extremes of these dimensions: negative affectivity (neuroticism); detachment (extreme introversion); antagonism (extremely low agreeableness); and disinhibition (extremely low conscientiousness). A fifth dimension, psychoti- cism, does not appear to be a pathological extreme of the final dimension of normal personality (openness)—rather, as we will discuss later in the chapter in the section on schizotypal person- ality disorder, it reflects traits similar to the symptoms of psy- chotic disorders (e.g., schizophrenia) (Watson et al., 2008). With these cautions and caveats in mind, we will look at the elusive and often exasperating clinical features of the personality disorders. It is important to bear in mind, however, that what we are describing is merely the prototype for each personality disorder. In reality, as would be expected from the standpoint of the five-factor model of personality disorders, it is rare for any individual to fit these “ideal” descriptions. And, as the Thinking Critically About   DSM-5   box below illustrates, this situation will not change in   DSM-5 .  M any new and innovative proposals were offered for inclusion in the personality disorders section of  DSM-5 . Indeed, the proposed revisions were among the most radical for any of the disorders covered in this book. The details were hotly debated, although the general goal was to incorporate a more dimensional approach to the assessment and diagnosis of personality pathology (Livesley, 2011; Skodol et al., 2011;Widiger et al., 2009). In the end, the   DSM-5   task force proposed revisions that reflected a   hybrid dimensional–categorical   model. This con- sisted of both categorical components and dimensional com- ponents. This model includes a set of general criteria for all personality disorders, an overall dimensional measure of the severity of personality dysfunction, a limited set of personality disorder types, and a set of pathological personality traits that could be specified in the absence of one of the personality dis- order types. The proposed categorical component also retained 6 of the original 10 specific personality disorder types (antiso- cial, avoidant, borderline, narcissistic, obsessive-compulsive, and schizotypal). The greatest change to the status quo came from the incor- poration of dimensional components. The new personality domain was intended to describe personality characteristics of  all   patients, even those without a specific personality disorder. The proposals would have allowed clinicians to rate the level of impairment in personality functioning, reflecting aspects of both identity (having a stable and coherent sense of self and the ability to pursue meaningful life goals) and interpersonal functioning (the capacity for empathy and intimacy). In addition, diagnosticians could indicate the degree to which the patient showed substantial abnormality on five trait domains (negative affectivity, detachment, antagonism, disinhibition, and psychoti- cism), which are based primarily on the five-factor trait model discussed in this chapter. In the end, however, the Board of Trustees of the American Psychiatric Association vetoed all of the proposed changes and decided to retain the old categories of personality disorders. In other words, personality disorders in   DSM-5   are the same as they were in   DSM-IV . Why were no changes accepted? We can- not be sure. But, as you may have gathered from our descrip- tion above, the new system was very complicated. Although it may have led to a better classification system, the fact that it was not very intuitive or user-friendly may have been a prob- lem. The primary audience for the   DSM   is clinicians who diag- nose and treat people with mental disorders. We suspect that the new proposed system was rejected because it was quite cumbersome and judged too time-consuming for overworked clinicians to learn and use. Moreover clinicians probably would not have found the proposed system to be user-friendly in part because the idea of rating people on dimensions is foreign to the way clinicians have been taught to think. The new propos- als were not dismissed entirely, however. They now appear in Section III of   DSM-5 , which describes disorders in need of fur- ther study. This may have been a wise course of action. Perhaps with more time and more research, it will become apparent whether or not the new approach provides enough benefits to make people willing to accept the challenges learning to use it will require.  Thinking criTically about DsM-5  Why Were No Changes Made to the Way Personality Disorders Are Diagnosed?   DSM- 5
Difficulties in Studying the Causes of Personality Disorders  Relatively little is known about the causal factors involved in the development of most personality disorders. One reason for this is that personality disorders only began to receive consistent attention from researchers after they entered the   DSM   in 1980. Another problem stems from the high level of comorbidity among them. For example, in an early review of four studies, Widiger and colleagues found that 85 percent of patients who qualified for one personality disorder diagnosis also qualified for at least one more, and many qualified for several more (Widiger & Rogers, 1989; Widiger et al., 1991). A study of nearly 900 psychiatric outpatients reported that 45 percent qualified for at least one personality disorder diagnosis and, among those with one, 60 percent had more than one and 25 percent had two or more (Zimmerman et al., 2005). Even in a nonpatient sample, Zimmerman and Coryell (1989) found that of those with one personality disorder, almost 25 percent had at least one more (see also Mattia & Zimmerman, 2001; Trull et al., 2012). This sub- stantial comorbidity adds to the difficulty of untangling which causal factors are associated with which personality disorder. Another problem in drawing conclusions about causes occurs because researchers have more confidence in prospective studies, in which groups of people are observed before a disor- der appears and are followed over a period of time to see which individuals develop problems and what causal factors have been present. Although this has begun to change, to date, relatively little prospective research has been conducted with most of the personality disorders. Instead, the vast majority of research has been conducted on people who already have the disorders; some of it relies on retrospective recall of prior events, and some of it relies on observing current biological, cognitive, emotional, and interpersonal functioning. Thus, any conclusions about causes that are suggested must be considered very tentative. Of possible biological factors, it has been suggested that infants’ temperament (an inborn disposition to react affectively to environmental stimuli; see Chapter 3) may predispose them to the development of particular personality traits and disorders (e.g., L. A. Clark, 2005; Mervielde et al., 2005; Paris, 2012). Some of the most important dimensions of temperament are negative emotionality, sociability versus social inhibition or shy- ness, and activity level. One way of thinking about temperament is that it lays the early foundation for the development of the adult personality, but it is not the sole determinant of adult per- sonality. Given that most temperamental and personality traits have been found to be moderately heritable (e.g., Bouchard & Loehlin, 2001; Livesley, 2005), it is not surprising that there is increasing evidence for genetic contributions to certain personal- ity disorders (e.g., Kendler et al., 2008, 2011; Livesley, 2005, 2008; Livesley & Jang, 2008; South et al., 2012; Torgersen et al., 2000). However, for at least most disorders, the genetic contribution appears to be mediated by the genetic contributions to the primary trait dimensions most implicated in each disorder rather than to the disorders themselves (Livesley, 2005; Kendler et al., 2008). In addition, some progress is being made in under- standing the psychobiological substrate of at least some of the traits prominently involved in the personality disorders (e.g., Depue, 2009; Depue & Lenzenweger, 2001, 2006; Livesley, 2008; Paris, 2005, 2007; Roussos & Siever, 2012). Among psychological factors, psychodynamic theorists originally attributed great importance in the development of character disorders to an infant’s getting excessive versus insuf- ficient gratification of his or her impulses in the first few years of life (Fonaghy & Luyten, 2012). More recently, learning-based habit patterns and maladaptive cognitive styles have received  One of the problems with the diagnostic categories of personality disor- ders is that the exact same observable behaviors may be associated with different personality disorders and yet have different meanings with each disorder. For example, this woman’s behavior and expression could sug- gest the suspiciousness and avoidance of blame seen in paranoid person- ality disorder. Or they could indicate the social withdrawal and absence of friends that characterize schizoid personality disorder. Or they could indicate the social anxiety about interacting with others because of fear of being rejected or negatively evaluated that is seen in avoidant personality disorder.  Genetic propensities and temperament may be important predisposing factors for the development of particular personality traits and disorders. Parental influences, including emotional, physical, and sexual abuse, may also play a big role in the development of personality disorders.
more attention as possible causal factors (e.g., Beck et al., 1990, 2004; Lobbestad & Arntz, 2012). Many of these maladaptive habits and cognitive styles that have been hypothesized to play important roles for certain disorders may originate in disturbed parent–child attachment relationships rather than derive simply from differences in temperament (e.g., Benjamin, 2005; Fraley & Shaver, 2008; Meyer & Pilkonis, 2005; Shiner, 2009). Parental psychopathology and ineffective parenting practices have also been implicated in certain disorders (e.g., Farrington, 2006; Paris, 2001, 2007). Many studies have also suggested that early emotional, physical, and sexual abuse may be important factors in a subset of cases for several different personality disorders (Battle et al., 2004; Grover et al., 2007). Various kinds of social stressors, societal changes, and cul- tural values have also been implicated as sociocultural causal factors (Paris, 2001). Ultimately, of course, the goal is to achieve a biopsychosocial perspective on the origins of each personality disorder, but today we are far from reaching that goal.  in review  •   What are three reasons for the high frequency of misdiagnoses of personality disorders?  •   What are two reasons why it is difficult to conduct research on personality disorders?  Cluster A Personality Disorders  People with Cluster A personality disorders display unusual behaviors such as distrust, suspiciousness, and social detachment and often come across as odd or eccentric. In the following sec- tion, we will look at paranoid, schizoid, and schizotypal person- ality disorders.  Paranoid Personality Disorder  Individuals with   paranoid personality disorder   have a per- vasive suspiciousness and distrust of others, leading to numer- ous interpersonal difficulties. They tend to see themselves as  table   10.1  Summary of Personality Disorders Personality Disorder   Characteristics   Prevalence   Gender Ratio Estimate Cluster A Paranoid   Suspiciousness and mistrust of others; tendency to see self as blameless; on guard for perceived attacks by others 0.5–2.5%   males   >   females  Schizoid   Impaired social relationships; inability and lack of desire to form attachments to others   < 1%   males   >   females  Schizotypal   Peculiar thought patterns; oddities of perception and speech that interfere with communication and social interaction 3%   males   >   females  Cluster B Histrionic   Self-dramatization; over concern with attractiveness; tendency to irritability and temper outbursts if attention seeking is frustrated 2–3%   males   =   females  Narcissistic   Grandiosity; preoccupation with receiving attention; self-promoting; lack of empathy   < 1%   males   >   females  Antisocial   Lack of moral or ethical development; inability to follow approved models of behavior; deceitfulness; shameless manipulation of others; history of conduct problems as a child 1% females, 3% males   males   >   females  Borderline   Impulsiveness; inappropriate anger; drastic mood shifts; chronic feelings of boredom; attempts at self-mutilation or suicide 2%   females   =   males  Cluster C Avoidant   Hypersensitivity to rejection or social derogation; shyness; insecurity in social interaction and initiating relationships 0.5–1%   males   =   females  Dependent   Difficulty in separating in relationships; discomfort at being alone; subordination of needs in order to keep others involved in a relationship; indecisiveness 2%   males   =   females  Obsessive-Compulsive   Excessive concern with order, rules, and trivial details; perfectionistic; lack of expressiveness and warmth; difficulty in relaxing and having fun 1%   males   >   females (by 2:1)  Source:   APA (2013); Weissman (1993); Zimmerman & Coryell (1990).
blameless, instead blaming others for their own mistakes and failures—even to the point of ascribing evil motives to others. Such people are chronically tense and “on guard,” constantly expecting trickery and looking for clues to validate their expec- tations while disregarding all evidence to the contrary. They are often preoccupied with doubts about the loyalty of friends and hence are reluctant to confide in others. They commonly bear grudges, refuse to forgive perceived insults and slights, and are quick to react with anger and sometimes violent behavior (Bernstein & Useda, 2007; Oltmanns & Okada, 2006). Recent research has suggested that paranoid personality disorder may consist of elements of both suspiciousness and hostility (Edens et al., 2009; Falkum et al., 2009). It is important to keep in mind that people with paranoid personalities are not usually psychotic; that is, most of the time they are in clear contact with reality, although they may experi- ence transient psychotic symptoms during periods of stress ( M. B. Miller, Useda et al., 2001). People with paranoid schizo- phrenia share some symptoms found in paranoid personality, but they have many additional problems including more persistent loss of contact with reality, delusions, and hallucinations. Never- theless, individuals with paranoid personality disorder do appear to be at elevated liability for schizophrenia (Lenzenweger, 2009).  Paranoid Construction Worker   A 40-year-old construction worker believes that his coworkers do not like him and fears that someone might let his scaffolding slip in order to cause him injury on the job. This concern followed a recent disagreement on the lunch line when the patient felt that a coworker was sneaking ahead and complained to him. He began noticing his new “enemy” laughing with the other men and often wondered if he were the butt of their mockery. . . . The patient offers little spontaneous information, sits tensely in the chair, is wide-eyed, and carefully tracks all movements in the room. He reads between the lines of the interviewer’s ques- tions, feels criticized, and imagines that the interviewer is siding with his coworkers. . . . He was a loner as a boy and felt that other children would form cliques and be mean to him. He did poorly in school but blamed his teachers—he claimed that they preferred girls or boys who were “sissies.” He dropped out of school and has since been a hard and effective worker, but he feels he never gets the breaks. He believes that he has been discriminated against because of his Catholicism but can offer little convincing evi- dence. He gets on poorly with bosses and coworkers, is unable to appreciate joking around, and does best in situations where he can work and have lunch alone. He has switched jobs many times because he felt he was being mistreated. The patient is distant and demanding with his family. His children call him “Sir” and know that it is wise to be “seen but not heard” when he is around. . . . He prefers not to have people visit his house and becomes restless when his wife is away visit- ing others. Source: Adapted with permission from the   DSM III Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Third Edition,   Case Book   (Copyright © 1981). American Psychiatric Association.  CAuSAl FACtORS   Little is known about important causal factors for paranoid personality disorder (Falkum et al., 2009). Some have argued for partial genetic transmission that may link the disorder to schizophrenia, but results examining this issue are inconsistent, and if there is a significant relationship it is not a strong one (Kendler et al., 2006; M. B. Miller, Useda  A.   A pervasive distrust and suspiciousness of others such that their motives are interpreted as malevolent, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the following:  1.   Suspects, without sufficient basis, that others are exploiting, harming, or deceiving him or her.  2.   Is preoccupied with unjustified doubts about the loyalty or trustworthiness of friends or associates.  3.   Is reluctant to confide in others because of unwarranted fear that the information will be used maliciously against him or her.  4.   Reads hidden demeaning or threatening meanings into benign remarks or events.  5.   Persistently bears grudges (i.e., is unforgiving of insults, injuries, or slights).  6.   Perceives attacks on his or her character or reputation that are not apparent to others and is quick to react angrily or to counterattack.  7.   Has recurrent suspicions, without justification, regarding fidelity of spouse or sexual partner.  B.   Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder or depressive disorder with psychotic features, or another psychotic disorder and is not attributable to the physiological effects of another medical condition.  Note:   If criteria are met prior to the onset of schizophrenia, add “premorbid,” i.e., “paranoid personality disorder (premorbid).” Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Fifth Edition, (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Paranoid Personality Disorder   DSM- 5
et al., 2001). There is a modest genetic liability to paranoid per- sonality disorder itself that may occur through the heritability of high levels of antagonism (low agreeableness) and neuroticism (angry-hostility), which are among the primary traits in paranoid personality disorder (Widiger, Trull et al., 2002; see also Falkum et al., 2009; Hopwood & Thomas, 2012; Kendler et al., 2006). (See Table 10.2 below.) Psychosocial causal factors that are sus- pected to play a role include parental neglect or abuse and expo- sure to violent adults, although any links between early adverse experiences and adult paranoid personality disorder are clearly not specific to this one personality disorder and may play a role in other disorders as well (Battle et al., 2004; Grover et al., 2007; Natsuaki et al., 2009).  Schizoid Personality Disorder  Individuals with   schizoid personality disorder   are usually unable to form social relationships and usually lack much inter- est in doing so. Consequently, they tend not to have good friends, with the possible exception of a close relative. Such people are unable to express their feelings and are seen by oth- ers as cold and distant. They often lack social skills and can be classified as loners or introverts, with solitary interests and occupations, although not all loners or introverts have schizoid personality disorder (Bernstein et al., 2009; M. B. Miller, Useda et al., 2001). People with this disorder tend not to take pleasure in many activities, including sexual activity, and rarely marry. More generally, they are not very emotionally reactive, rarely  table   10.2  DSM-IV   Personality Disorders and the Five-Factor Model NEO-PI-R Domains and Facets   PAR   SZD   SZt   AtS   BDl   HSt   NAR   AVD   DEP   OBC Neuroticism  Anxiety   H   H   H   H Angry-hostility   H   H   H   H Depression   H   H   H Self-consciousness   H   H   H   H   H Impulsiveness   H Vulnerability   H   H   H  Extraversion  Warmth   L   L   H   H Gregarious   L   L   H   L Assertiveness   L   L   H Activity Excitement seeking   H   H   L Positive emotions   L   L   H  Openness to Experience  Fantasy   H   H   H Aesthetics Feelings   L   H Actions   H Ideas   H Values   L  Agreeableness  Trust   L   L   L   H   H Straightforwardness   L   L Altruism   L   L   H Compliance   L   L   L   H   L Modesty   L   H Tender mindedness   L   L  Conscientiousness  Competence   L   H Order   H Dutifulness   L   H Achievement striving   H   H Self-discipline   L Deliberation   L Note: NEO-PI-R   =   Revised NEO Personality Inventory. H, L   =   high, low, respectively, based on the fourth edition of the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders   ( DSM-IV;   American Psychiatric Association, 1994) diagnostic criteria. Personality disorders: PAR   =   paranoid; SZD = schizoid; SZT   =   schizotypal; ATS   =   antisocial; BDL   =   borderline; HST   =   histrionic; NAR   =   narcissistic; AVD   =   avoidant; DEP   =   dependent; OBC   =  obsessive-compulsive.  Source:   Adapted from Widiger, Trull et al. (2002). A description of the DSM-IV personality disorders with the five-factor model of personality. In P. T. Costa & T. A. Widiger (Eds.),   Personality Disorders and the Five-Factor Model of Personality   (2nd ed.) (p. 90). Washington, DC: APA Books.
experiencing strong positive or negative emotions, but rather show a generally apathetic mood. These deficits contribute to their appearing cold and aloof (M. B. Miller, Useda et al., 2001; Mittal et al., 2007). In terms of the five-factor model, they show extremely high levels of introversion (especially low on warmth, gregariousness, and positive emotions). They are also low on openness to feelings (one facet of openness to experience) (Widiger, Trull et al., 2002) and on achievement striving (e.g., Hopwood & Thomas, 2012).  CAuSAl FACtORS   Like paranoid personality disorder, schiz- oid personality disorder has not been the focus of much research attention. This is hardly surprising since people with schizoid personality disorder are not exactly the people we might expect to volunteer for a research study. Early theorists considered a schizoid personality to be a likely precursor to the development of schizophrenia, but this viewpoint has been challenged, and any genetic link that may exist is very modest (Kalus et al., 1995; Kendler et al., 2006; Lenzenweger, 2010; M. B. Miller, Useda et al., 2001). Schizoid personality traits have also been shown to have only a modest heritability (Kendler et al., 2006). Some theorists have suggested that the severe disruption in sociability seen in schizoid personality disorder may be due to severe impairment in an underlying affiliative system (Depue & Lenzenweger, 2005, 2006). Cognitive theorists propose that individuals with schizoid personality disorder exhibit cool and aloof behavior because of maladaptive underlying schemas that lead them to view themselves as self-sufficient loners and to view others as intrusive. Their core dysfunctional belief might be, “I am basically alone” (Beck et al., 1990, p. 51) or “Relationships are messy [and] undesirable” (Pretzer & Beck, 1996, p. 60; see also Beck et al., 2004). Unfortunately, we do not know why or how some people might develop such dysfunctional beliefs.  Schizotypal Personality Disorder  Individuals with   schizotypal personality disorder   are also excessively introverted and have pervasive social and inter- personal deficits (like those that occur in schizoid personality disorder), but in addition they have cognitive and perceptual distortions, as well as oddities and eccentricities in their com- munication and behavior (Kwapil & Barrantes-Vidal, 2012; Raine, 2006). Although contact with reality is usually main- tained, highly personalized and superstitious thinking is char- acteristic of people with schizotypal personality, and under extreme stress they may experience transient psychotic symp- toms (APA, 2013; Widiger & Frances, 1994). Indeed, they often believe that they have magical powers and may engage in magical rituals. Other cognitive–perceptual problems include ideas of reference (the belief that conversations or gestures of others have special meaning or personal significance), odd speech, and paranoid beliefs.  The Introverted Computer Analyst   Bill, a highly intelligent but quite introverted and withdrawn 33-year-old com- puter analyst, was referred for psychological evaluation by his physician, who was concerned that Bill might be depressed and unhappy. Bill had virtually no contact with other people. He lived alone in his apartment, worked in a small office by himself, and usually saw no one at work except his supervisor, who occasion- ally visited to give him new work and pick up completed proj- ects. He ate lunch by himself, and about once a week, on nice days, went to the zoo for his lunch break. Bill was a lifelong loner; as a child he had had few friends and had always preferred solitary activities over family outings (he was the oldest of five children). In high school he had never dated and in college had gone out with a woman only once— and that was with a group of students after a game. He had been  A.   A pervasive pattern of detachment from social relationships and a restricted range of expression of emotions in interpersonal set- tings, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the following:  1.   Neither desires nor enjoys close relationships, including being part of a family.  2.   Almost always chooses solitary activities.  3.   Has little, if any, interest in having sexual experiences with another person.  4.   Takes pleasure in few, if any, activities.  5.   Lacks close friends or confidants other than first-degree relatives.  6.   Appears indifferent to the praise or criticism of others.  7.   Shows emotional coldness, detachment, or flattened affectivity.  B.   Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder or depressive disorder with psychotic fea- tures, another psychotic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder and is not attributable to the physiological effects of another medical condition.  Note:   If criteria are met prior to the onset of schizophrenia, add “premorbid,” i.e., “schizoid personality disorder (premorbid).” Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Fifth Edition, (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Schizoid Personality Disorder   DSM- 5
active in sports, however, and had played varsity football in both high school and college. In college he had spent a lot of time with one relatively close friend—mostly drinking. However, this friend now lived in another city. Bill reported rather matter-of-factly that he had a hard time making friends; he never knew what to say in a conversation. On a number of occasions he had thought of becoming friends with other people but simply couldn’t think of the right words, so “the con- versation just died.” He reported that he had given some thought lately to changing his life in an attempt to be more “positive,” but it had never seemed worth the trouble. It was easier for him not to make the effort because he became embarrassed when someone tried to talk with him. He was happiest when he was alone.  Oddities in thinking, speech, and other behaviors are the most stable characteristics of schizotypal personality disorder (McGlashan et al., 2005) and are similar to those often seen in patients with schizophrenia. In fact, many researchers concep- tualize schizotypal personality disorder as an attenuated form of schizophrenia (Lenzenweger, 2010; Raine, 2006). Interestingly, although some aspects of schizotypy appear related to the five- factor model of normal personality (specifically facets of intro- version and neuroticism), the other aspects related to cognitive and perceptual distortions are   not   adequately explained by the five-factor model of normal personality (Watson et al., 2008). Indeed, these core symptoms of schizotypy form the basis of the only proposed trait that does not map neatly unto the five factors of normal personality. This final pathological trait is psychoti- cism, which consists of three facets: unusual beliefs and experi- ences, eccentricity, and cognitive and perceptual dysregulation (Krueger, Eaton, Derringer et al., 2011b).  CAuSAl FACtORS   Unlike schizoid and paranoid personal- ity disorders, there has been a significant amount of research on schizotypal personality disorder (Esterberg et al., 2010). In fact, in the original proposal for the   DSM-5 , schizotypal personality was the only categorical disorder retained from Cluster A. Esti- mates of the prevalence of this disorder in the general popula- tion have varied somewhat, but one good review of such studies has estimated that the prevalence is about 2 to 3 percent in the general population (Raine, 2006). The heritability of schizotypal personality disorder is moderate (Kwapil & Barrantes-Vidal, 2012; Raine, 2006; Lin et al., 2006, 2007). The biological associations of schizotypal personality dis- order with schizophrenia are remarkable (Cannon et al., 2008; Jang et al., 2005; Siever & Davis, 2004; Yung et al., 2004). A number of studies on patients, as well as on college students, with schizotypal personality disorder (e.g., Raine, 2006; Siever et al., 1995) have shown the same deficit in the ability to track a moving target visually that is found in schizophrenia (Coccaro, 2001; see also  3). They also show numerous other mild impairments in cognitive functioning (Voglmaier et al., 2005), including deficits in their ability to sustain atten- tion (Lees-Roitman et al., 1997; Raine, 2006) and deficits in working memory (e.g., being able to remember a span of digits), both of which are common in schizophrenia (Farmer et al., 2000; Squires-Wheeler et al., 1997). In addition, individuals with schizotypal personality disorder, like patients with schizo- phrenia, show deficits in their ability to inhibit attention to a second stimulus that rapidly follows presentation of a first stimu- lus. For example, normal individuals presented with a weak audi- tory stimulus about 0.1 second before a loud sound that elicits a startle response show a smaller startle response than those not presented the weak auditory stimulus first (Cadenhead, Light  A.   A pervasive pattern of social and interpersonal deficits marked by acute discomfort with, and reduced capacity for, close relation- ships as well as by cognitive or perceptual distortions and eccen- tricities of behavior, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:  1.   Ideas of reference (excluding delusions of reference).  2.   Odd beliefs or magical thinking that influences behavior and is inconsistent with subcultural norms (e.g., superstitiousness, belief in clairvoyance, telepathy, or “sixth sense”; in children and adolescents, bizarre fantasies or preoccupations).  3.   Unusual perceptual experiences, including bodily illusions.  4.   Odd thinking and speech (e.g., vague, circumstantial, meta- phorical, overelaborate, or stereotyped).  5.   Suspiciousness or paranoid ideation.  6.   Inappropriate or constricted affect.  7.   Behavior or appearance that is odd, eccentric, or peculiar.  8.   Lack of close friends or confidants other than first-degree relatives.  9.   Excessive social anxiety that does not diminish with familiar- ity and tends to be associated with paranoid fears rather than negative judgments about self.  B.   Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder or depressive disorder with psychotic fea- tures, another psychotic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder.  Note:   If criteria are met prior to the onset of schizophrenia, add “premorbid,” e.g., “schizotypal personality disorder (premorbid).” Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Fifth Edition, (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Schizotypal Personality Disorder   DSM- 5
et al., 2000a; Cadenhead, Swerdlow et al., 2000b). This normal inhibitory effect is reduced in people with schizotypal personal- ity disorder and with schizophrenia, a phenomenon that may be related to their high levels of distractibility and difficulty staying focused (see also Hazlett et al., 2003; Raine, 2006). Finally, they also show language abnormalities that may be related to abnor- malities in their auditory processing (Dickey et al., 2008). A genetic relationship to schizophrenia has also long been suspected. In fact, this disorder appears to be part of a spectrum of liability for schizophrenia that often occurs in some of the first-degree relatives of people with schizophrenia (Kendler & Gardner, 1997; Kwapil & Barrantes-Vidal, 2012; Raine, 2006; Tienari et al., 2003). Moreover, teenagers who have schizotypal personality disorder have been shown to be at increased risk for developing schizophrenia and schizophrenia-spectrum disorders in adulthood (Asarnow, 2005; Cannon et al., 2008; Raine, 2006; Tyrka et al., 1995). Nevertheless, it has also been proposed that there is a second subtype of schizotypal personality disorder that is not genetically linked to schizophrenia. This subtype is charac- terized by cognitive and perceptual deficits and is instead linked to a history of childhood abuse and early trauma (Berenbaum et al., 2008; Raine, 2006). Schizotypal personality disorder in adolescence has been associated with elevated exposure to stress- ful life events (Anglin et al., 2008; Tessner et al., 2011) and low family socioeconomic status (Cohen et al., 2008).  Cluster B Personality Disorders  In the following section, we look closely at histrionic, narcissistic, antisocial, and borderline personality disorders. Remember that people with Cluster B personality disorders share a tendency to be dramatic, emotional, and erratic.  Histrionic Personality Disorder  Excessive attention-seeking behavior and emotionality are the key characteristics of individuals with   histrionic personality disorder . As you can see from the table of   DSM-5   criteria, these individuals tend to feel unappreciated if they are not the center of attention; their lively, dramatic, and excessively extraverted styles often ensure that they can charm others into attending to them. But these qualities do not lead to stable and satisfying relationships because others tire of providing this level of atten- tion. In craving stimulation and attention, their appearance and behavior are often quite theatrical and emotional as well as sexually provocative and seductive (Freeman et al., 2005). They may attempt to control their partners through seductive behavior and emotional manipulation, but they also show a good deal of dependence (e.g., Blagov et al., 2007; Bornstein & Malka, 2009; P. R. Rasmussen, 2005). Their speech is often vague and impres- sionistic, and they are usually considered self-centered, vain, and excessively concerned about the approval of others, who see them as overly reactive, shallow, and insincere. The prevalence of histrionic personality disorder in the general population is estimated at 2 to 3 percent, although the prevalence of this disorder may be decreasing (Blashfield et al., 2012). Some (but not all) studies suggest that this disorder occurs more often in women than in men (Lynam & Widiger, 2007; Widiger & Bornstein, 2001). Reasons for the possible sex difference have been very controversial. One review of these controversies suggested that this sex difference is not surprising, given the number of traits that occur more often in females that are involved in the diagnostic criteria. For example, many of the criteria for histrionic personality disorder (as well as for several other personality disorders such as dependent) involve maladap- tive variants of female-related traits (e.g., Widiger & Bornstein, 2001) such as overdramatization, vanity, seductiveness, and overconcern with physical appearance. However, other personal- ity traits prominent in histrionic personality disorder are actually more common in men than in women (e.g., high excitement seeking and low self-consciousness). A recent careful analysis of the issue suggests that the higher prevalence of histrionic person- ality in women actually would not be predicted based on known sex differences in the personality traits prominent in the disor- der. This does indeed suggest the influence of some form of sex bias in the diagnosis of this disorder (Lynam & Widiger, 2007).  CAuSAl FACtORS   Very little systematic research has been conducted on histrionic personality disorder, perhaps as a result of the difficulty researchers have had in differentiating it from other personality disorders (Bornstein & Malka, 2009) and/or because many do not believe it is a valid diagnosis (Blashfield et al., 2012). Indeed one leading theorist and researcher on this topic has referred to the diagnosis as being “dead” (Blashfield et al., 2012). Reflecting this, histrionic personality disorder was one of the four diagnoses that was recommended for removal in  DSM-5 . Histrionic personality disorder is highly comorbid with  This woman could be just “clowning around” one night in a bar with friends. But if she frequently seeks opportunities to engage in seductive and attention-seeking behavior, she could have histrionic personality disorder.
borderline, antisocial, narcissistic, and dependent personality dis- order diagnoses (Bakkevig & Karterud, 2010; Blagov & Westen, 2008; Bornstein & Malka, 2009).  A Histrionic Housewife   Lulu, a 24-year-old house- wife, was seen in an inpatient unit several days after she had been picked up for “vagrancy” after her husband had left her at the bus station to return her to her own family because he was tired of her behavior and of taking care of her. Lulu showed up for the interview all made-up and in a very feminine robe, with her hair done in a very special way. Throughout the interview with a male psychiatrist, she showed flirtatious and somewhat childlike seductive gestures and talked in a rather vague way about her problems and her life. Her chief complaints were that her husband had deserted her and that she couldn’t return to her family because two of her brothers had abused her. Moreover, she had no friends to turn to and wasn’t sure how she was going to get along. Indeed, she complained that she had never had female friends, whom she felt just didn’t like her, although she wasn’t quite sure why, assuring the interviewer that she was a very nice and kind person. Recently she and her husband had been out driving with a couple who were friends of her husband’s. The wife had accused Lulu of being overly seductive toward the wife’s husband, and Lulu had been hurt, thinking her behavior was perfectly innocent and not at all out of line. This incident led to a big argument with her own husband, one in a long series over the past 6 months in which he complained about her inappropriate behavior around other men and about how vain and needing of attention she was. These arguments and her failure to change her behavior had ulti- mately led her husband to desert her.  There is some evidence for a genetic link with antisocial personality disorder, the idea being that there may be some com- mon underlying predisposition that is more likely to be mani- fested in women as histrionic personality disorder and in men as antisocial personality disorder (e.g., Cale & Lilienfeld, 2002a, 2002b). The suggestion of some genetic propensity to develop this disorder is also supported by findings that histrionic person- ality disorder may be characterized as involving extreme versions of two common, normal personality traits, extraversion and, to a lesser extent, neuroticism—two normal personality traits known to have a partial genetic basis (Widiger & Bornstein, 2001). In terms of the five-factor model (refer back to Table 10.2 on p. 335), the very high levels of extraversion of patients with histrionic personality disorder include high levels of gregarious- ness, excitement seeking, and positive emotions. Their high levels of neuroticism particularly involve the depression and self- consciousness facets; they are also high on openness to fantasies (Widiger, Trull et al., 2002). Cognitive theorists emphasize the importance of maladaptive schemas revolving around the need for attention to validate self- worth. Core dysfunctional beliefs might include, “Unless I capti- vate people, I am nothing” and “If I can’t entertain people, they will abandon me” (Beck et al., 1990, p. 50). No systematic research has yet explored how these dysfunctional beliefs might develop.  Narcissistic Personality Disorder  Individuals with   narcissistic personality disorder   show an exag- gerated sense of self-importance, a preoccupation with being admired, and a lack of empathy for the feelings of others (Pincus & Lukowitsky, 2010; Ronningstam, 2005, 2009, 2012). Numerous studies support the notion of two subtypes of narcissism: grandi- ose and vulnerable narcissism (Cain et al., 2008; Ronningstam, 2005, 2012). The grandiose presentation of narcissistic patients, highlighted in the   DSM-5   criteria, is manifested by traits related to grandiosity, aggression, and dominance. These are reflected in a strong tendency to overestimate their abilities and accomplish- ments while underestimating the abilities and accomplishments of others. Their sense of entitlement is frequently a source of aston- ishment to others, although they themselves seem to regard their lavish expectations as merely what they deserve. They behave in stereotypical ways (e.g., with constant self-references and bragging)  A pervasive pattern of excessive emotionality and attention seek- ing, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of con- texts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:  1.   Is uncomfortable in situations in which he or she is not the cen- ter of attention.  2.   Interaction with others is often characterized by inappropriate sexually seductive or provocative behavior.  3.   Displays rapidly shifting and shallow expression of emotions.  4.   Consistently uses physical appearance to draw attention to self.  5.   Has a style of speech that is excessively impressionistic and lacking in detail.  6.   Shows self-dramatization, theatricality, and exaggerated expression of emotion.  7.   Is suggestible (i.e., easily influenced by others or circumstances).  8.   Considers relationships to be more intimate than they actually are. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Fifth Edition, (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Histrionic Personality Disorder   DSM-5
to gain the acclaim and recognition they crave. Because they believe they are so special, they often think they can be understood only by other high-status people or that they should associate only with such people, as was the case with Bob at the beginning of the chap- ter. Finally, their sense of entitlement is also associated with their unwillingness to forgive others for perceived slights, and they easily take offense (Exline et al., 2004). The vulnerable presentation of narcissism is not as clearly reflected in the   DSM   criteria but nevertheless represents a sub- type long observed by researchers and clinicians. Vulnerable narcissists have a very fragile and unstable sense of self-esteem, and for these individuals, arrogance and condescension is merely a façade for intense shame and hypersensitivity to rejection and criticism (Cain et al., 2008; Miller et al., 2010; Pincus & Lukowitsky, 2010; Ronningstam, 2005, 2012). Vulnerable nar- cissists may become completely absorbed and preoccupied with fantasies of outstanding achievement but at the same time expe- rience profound shame about their ambitions. They may avoid interpersonal relationships due to fear of rejection or criticism. There is increasing evidence that the grandiose and vul- nerable presentations of narcissism are related but distinct in important ways. In terms of the five-factor model, both subtypes are associated with high levels of interpersonal antagonism/low agreeableness (which includes traits of low modesty, arrogance, grandiosity, and superiority), low altruism (expecting favorable treatment and exploiting others), and tough-mindedness (lack of empathy). (Refer back to Table 10.2 on p. 335.) However, the primarily grandiose narcissist is exceptionally low in certain facets of neuroticism and high in extraversion. For the grandi- ose narcissist, close friends and relatives may be more distressed about his or her behavior than the narcissist him- or herself. One study concluded, “The strongest impairment associated with narcissistic personality disorder is the distress of ‘pain and suffer- ing’ experienced not by the narcissist but by his or her significant others” ( J. D. Miller, 2007, p. 176). However, the case is quite different for the vulnerable narcissist, who has very   high   levels of negative affectivity/neuroticism (Cain et al., 2008; Miller et al., 2010). Thus, spouses describe patients with either grandiosity or vulnerability as being “bossy, intolerant, cruel, argumentative, dishonest, opportunistic, conceited, arrogant, and demanding,” but only those high on grandiosity were additionally described as being “aggressive, hardheaded, outspoken, assertive, and determined,” while those high on vulnerability were described as “worrying, emotional, defensive, anxious, bitter, tense, and com- plaining” (Wink, 1991, p. 595). Importantly, some narcissistic individuals may fluctuate between grandiosity and vulnerability (Pincus & Lukowitsky, 2010; Ronningstam, 2009). Narcissistic personalities also share another central trait— they are unwilling or unable to take the perspective of others, to see things other than “through their own eyes.” Moreover, if they do not receive the validation or assistance they desire, they are inclined to be hypercritical and retaliatory (P. S. Rasmussen, 2005). Indeed, one study of male students with high levels of narcissistic traits showed that they had greater tendencies toward sexual coercion when they were rejected by the target of their sexual desires than did men with lower levels of narcissistic traits. They also rated filmed depictions of rape less unfavorably and as more enjoyable and sexually arousing than did the men with low levels of narcissistic traits (Bushman et al., 2003). Narcissistic personality disorder may be more frequently observed in men than in women (Golomb et al., 1995). A recent quantitative review supports this finding and has also shown that this gender difference is to be expected, based on known sex dif- ferences in the personality traits most prominent in narcissistic personality disorder (Lynam & Widiger, 2007). Compared with some of the other personality disorders, narcissistic personality disorder is thought to be relatively rare. It is estimated to occur in about 1 percent of the population.  A pervasive pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy or behavior), need for admiration, and lack of empathy, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:  1.   Has a grandiose sense of self-importance (e.g., exaggerates achievements and talents, expects to be recognized as supe- rior without commensurate achievements).  2.   Is preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, bril- liance, beauty, or ideal love.  3.   Believes that he or she is “special” and unique and can only be understood by, or should associate with, other special or high- status people (or institutions).  4.   Requires excessive admiration.  5.   Has a sense of entitlement (i.e., unreasonable expectations of especially favorable treatment or automatic compliance with his or her expectations).  6.   Is interpersonally exploitative (i.e., takes advantage of others to achieve his or her own ends).  7.   Lacks empathy: is unwilling to recognize or identify with the feelings and needs of others.  8.   Is often envious of others or believes that others are envious of him or her.  9.   Shows arrogant, haughty behaviors or attitudes. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Fifth Edition, (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Narcissistic Personality Disorder   DSM-5
CAuSAl FACtORS   Until the past decade, there was a wealth of theories (Kohut & Wolff, 1978; Millon & Davis, 1995; Widiger & Bornstein, 2001) but precious little empirical data on the envi- ronmental and genetic factors involved in the etiology of narcissistic personality disorder. Fortunately, a number of researchers are now actively trying to understand the causes of this fascinating disorder. A key finding has been that the grandiose and vulnerable forms of narcissism are associated with different causal factors. Grandiose narcissism has not generally been associated with childhood abuse, neglect, or poor parenting. Indeed, there is some evidence that grandiose narcissism is associated with parental overvaluation. By contrast, vulnerable narcissism has been associated with emotional, physical, and sexual abuse, as well parenting styles characterized as intrusive, controlling, and cold (Horton et al., 2006; Miller, 2011; Miller & Campbell, 2008; Otway & Vignoles, 2006).  A Narcissistic Student   A 25-year-old, single graduate student complains to his psychoanalyst of difficulty completing his Ph.D. in English literature and expresses concerns about his rela- tionships with women. He believes that his thesis topic may pro- foundly increase the level of understanding in his discipline and make him famous, but so far he has not been able to get past the third chapter. His mentor does not seem sufficiently impressed with his ideas, and the patient is furious at him but also self-doubting and ashamed. He blames his mentor for his lack of progress and thinks that he deserves more help with his grand idea, and that his mentor should help with some of the research. The patient brags about his creativity and complains that other people are “jealous” of his insight. He is very envious of students who are moving along faster than he and regards them as “dull drones and ass-kissers.” He prides himself on the brilliance of his class participation and imagines someday becoming a great professor. He becomes rapidly infatuated with women and has power- ful and persistent fantasies about each new woman he meets, but after several sexual experiences feels disappointed and finds them dumb, clinging, and physically repugnant. He has many “friends,” but they turn over quickly, and no one relationship lasts very long. People get tired of his continual self-promotion and lack of con- sideration of them. For example, he was lonely at Christmas and insisted that his best friend stay in town rather than visit his family. The friend refused, criticizing the patient’s self-centeredness; and the patient, enraged, decided never to see this friend again. Source: Adapted with permission from the   DSM III Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Third Edition, Case Book (Copyright © 1981). American Psychiatric Association.  Antisocial Personality Disorder  Individuals with antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) continu- ally violate and show disregard for the rights of others through deceitful, aggressive, or antisocial behavior, typically without remorse or loyalty to anyone. They tend to be impulsive, irritable, and aggressive and to show a pattern of generally irresponsible behavior. This pattern of behavior must have been occurring since the age of 15, and before age 15 the person must have had symp- toms of conduct disorder, a similar disorder occurring in children and young adolescents who show persistent patterns of aggression toward people or animals, destruction of property, deceitfulness or theft, and serious violation of rules at home or in school. Because this personality disorder and its causes have been studied far more extensively than the others, and because of its enormous costs to society, it will be examined in some detail later (refer back to Table 10.2 on p. 335).  A Thief With Antisocial Personality Disorder  Mark, a 22-year-old, was awaiting trial for car theft and armed robbery. His case records included a long history of arrests beginning at age 9, when he had been picked up for vandalism. He had been expelled from high school for truancy and disrup- tive behavior. On a number of occasions he had run away from home for days or weeks at a time—always returning in a  Otto Kernberg (b. 1928) is an influential contem- porary psychoanalytic theorist who has written a great deal about bor- derline and narcissistic personality disorders.  Heinz Kohut (1913–1981), another contemporary psychoanalytic thinker, theorized that poor par- enting can cause narcis- sistic personality disorder by failing to build a child’s normal self-confidence.
disheveled and “rundown” condition. To date he had not held a job for more than a few days at a time even though his generally charming manner enabled him to obtain work readily. He was described as a loner with few friends. Although initially charming, Mark usually soon antagonized those he met with his aggressive, self-oriented behavior. Shortly after his first therapy session, he skipped bail and presumably left town to avoid his trial.  Borderline Personality Disorder  People with   borderline personality disorder (BPD)   show a pat- tern of behavior characterized by impulsivity and instability in interpersonal relationships, self-image, and moods. However, the term   borderline personality   has a long and rather confusing history (Hooley et al., 2012). Originally it was most often used to refer to a condition that was thought to occupy the “bor- der” between neurotic and psychotic disorders (as in the term  borderline schizophrenia ). Later, however, this sense of the term  borderline   became identified with schizotypal personality disorder, which (as we noted earlier) is biologically related to schizophrenia. The cur- rent diagnosis of BPD is no longer considered to be biologically related to schizophrenia.  Watch   the   Video   Liz: Borderline Personality Disorder   on   MyPsychLab  The central characteristic of BPD is   affective instability , man- ifested by unusually intense emotional responses to environmen- tal triggers, with delayed recovery to a baseline emotional state. Affective instability is also characterized by drastic and rapid shifts from one emotion to another (Livesley, 2008; Paris, 2007). In addition, people with BPD have a   highly unstable self-image  or sense of self, which is sometimes described as “impoverished and/or fragmented” (Livesley, 2008, p. 44). Given their affective instability combined with unstable self-image, it is not surprising that these people have highly unstable interpersonal relation- ships. These relationships tend to be intense but stormy, typi- cally involving overidealizations of friends or lovers that later end in bitter disillusionment, disappointment, and anger (Gunderson et al., 1995; Lieb et al., 2004). Nevertheless, they may make des- perate efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment, perhaps because their fears of abandonment are so intense (Lieb et al., 2004; Livesley, 2008). Recent experimental research supports a causal link between the perception of rejection and intense, uncontrollable rage in BPD (Berenson et al., 2011). Another very important feature of BPD is   impulsivity   char- acterized by rapid responding to environmental triggers without thinking (or caring) about long-term consequences (Paris, 2007). These individuals’ high levels of impulsivity combined with their extreme affective instability often lead to erratic, self-destructive behaviors such as gambling sprees or reckless driving. Suicide attempts, sometimes flagrantly manipulative, can be part of the clinical picture (Paris, 1999, 2007). However, such attempts are not always simply manipulative; prospective studies suggest that approximately 8 to 10 percent may ultimately complete suicide (Oldham, 2006; Skodol, Gunderson et al., 2002).   Self-mutilation  (such as repetitive cutting behavior) is another characteristic feature of borderline personality. However, as illustrated in the Thinking Critically About   DSM-5   box on page 343, many peo- ple who engage in self-injury do not have BPD. In some cases the self-injurious behavior is associated with relief from anxiety or dysphoria, and it also serves to communicate the person’s level of distress to others (Paris, 2007). Research has also documented that borderline personality is associated with analgesia in as many as 70 to 80 percent of women with BPD (analgesia is the  A pervasive pattern of instability of interpersonal relationships, self-image, and affects, and marked impulsivity, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:  1.   Frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment. ( Note:  Do not include suicidal or self-mutilating behavior covered in Criterion 5.)  2.   A pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal relationships characterized by alternating between extremes of idealization and devaluation.  3.   Identity disturbance: markedly and persistently unstable self- image or sense of self.  4.   Impulsivity in at least two areas that are potentially self- damaging (e.g., spending, sex, substance abuse, reckless driving, binge eating). ( Note:   Do not include suicidal or self- mutilating behavior covered in Criterion 5.)  5.   Recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats, or self- mutilating behavior.  6.   Affective instability due to a marked reactivity of mood (e.g., intense episodic dysphoria, irritability, or anxiety usually last- ing a few hours and only rarely more than a few days).  7.   Chronic feelings of emptiness.  8.   Inappropriate, intense anger or difficulty controlling anger (e.g., fre- quent displays of temper, constant anger, recurrent physical fights).  9.   Transient, stress-related paranoid ideation or severe dissocia- tive symptoms. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Fifth Edition, (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Borderline Personality Disorder   DSM-5
absence of the experience of pain in the presence of a theoreti- cally painful stimulus; Figueroa & Silk, 1997; Schmahl et al., 2004). The following prototypic case illustrates the frequent risk of suicide and self-mutilation among borderline personalities.  Watch   the   Video   Mary: Non-Suicidal Self-Injury   on   MyPsychLab  Self-Mutilation in Borderline Personality Disorder   A 26-year-old unemployed woman was referred for admission to a hospital by her therapist because of intense suicidal preoccupation and urges to mutilate herself with a razor. The patient was apparently well until her junior year in high school, when she became preoccupied with religion and philosophy, avoided friends, and was filled with doubt about who she was. Academically she did well, but later, during col- lege, her performance declined. In college she began to use a variety of drugs, abandoned the religion of her family, and seemed to be searching for a charismatic religious figure with whom to identify. At times, massive anxiety swept over her, and she found it would suddenly vanish if she cut her forearm with a razor blade. Three years ago she began psychotherapy and initially rapidly idealized her therapist as being incredibly intuitive and empathic. Later she became hostile and demanding of him, requiring more and more sessions, sometimes twice in 1 day. Her life centered on her therapist, by this time to the exclusion of everyone else. Although her hostility toward her therapist was obvious, she could neither see it nor control it. Her difficulties with her therapist culminated in many episodes of her forearm cutting and suicidal threats, which led to the referral for admission. Source: Adapted with permission from the   DSM III Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Third Edition, Case Book (Copyright © 1981). American Psychiatric Association.  People with borderline personality disorder often engage in self-destructive behaviors including repetitive cutting and other forms of self-injury. But not everyone who engages in self-injury has borderline personality disor- der. In   DSM-5   a new disorder called nonsuicidal self-injury disorder has been added provisionally as a disorder in need of further research.  N onsuicidal self-injury (NSSI) involves deliberate damage to body tissue such as might occur with skin cutting or burning (Nock, 2009). This behavior (which is sometimes called self-mutilation) occurs in the absence of an intent to die (hence the term nonsuicidal). Self-mutilating behavior has long been listed in the   DSM   as a symptom of BPD. However, many people who engage in self-injury do not have BPD, although they do report high levels of depressive symptoms, anxiety, suicidality, and generally low levels of functioning (Selby et al., 2012). People who engage in NSSI are also at elevated risk for later suicide (Wilkinson et al., 2011). For these reasons, the  DSM-5   task force was charged with determining whether people who display a significant amount of nonsuicidal self-injurious behavior should be diagnosed with a new disorder that would called “nonsuicidal self-injury disorder”. NSSI is found in males and females, as well as in people of all ethnicities and economic backgrounds. However, the risk for NSSI seems to be greatest in the adolescent years. One Finnish study reported a 11.5 percent prevalence rate in young people aged 13–18. And an Internet-based study of college students at two U.S. universities found a lifetime prevalence of 17 percent. Perhaps most shocking were the results from a U.S. study of 10- to 14-year-old girls that found a lifetime prevalence of NSSI of 56 percent (Hilt et al., 2008). Why do people hurt themselves by cutting or burning? Tension relief is one reason that many people give. NSSI is often used to regulate intense or extreme emotions. Hooley et al. (2010) have also found that people who engage in NSSI tend to have higher pain endurances than the rest of us. In addition, they have a highly self-critical cognitive style and “may regard suffering and pain as something they deserve” (Hooley et al., 2010, p. 170). This may help explain why such people choose to regulate their emotions by engaging in behaviors that are self-damaging and painful. NSSI is a growing problem. Recognizing this, it has now been added to   DSM-5 . NSSI disorder is listed in Section III, which is used to describe conditions in need of further study. This move is likely to stimulate research. As we learn more we may be in a better position to understand, treat, and perhaps even prevent this increasingly prevalent condition.  DSM-5  Thinking criTically about DsM-5  Nonsuicidal Self-Injury: Distinct Disorder or Symptom of Borderline Personality Disorder?
In addition to affective and impulsive behavioral symp- toms, as many as 75 percent of people with BPD have cognitive symptoms. These include relatively short or transient episodes in which they appear to be out of contact with reality and experi- ence delusions or other psychotic-like symptoms such as halluci- nations, paranoid ideas, or severe dissociative symptoms (Lieb et al., 2004; Paris, 2007; Skodol, Gunderson et al., 2002). Estimates are that only about 1 to 2 percent of the population may qualify for the diagnosis of BPD (Lenzenweger et al., 2007), but they represent about 10 percent of patients in outpatient and 20 percent of patients in inpatient clinical settings (Lieb et al., 2004; Torgersen et al., 2001). Although early research found that approximately 75 percent of individuals receiving this diagnosis in clinical settings are women, such findings likely arise from a gen- der imbalance in treatment seeking rather than prevalence of the disorder. In support of this, more recent epidemiological studies of community residents suggest an equal gender ratio (Coid et al., 2009; Grant et al., 2008; Hooley et al., 2012).  COMORBIDIty WItH OtHER DISORDERS   Given the many and varied symptoms of BPD, it is not surprising that this personality disorder produces significant impairment in social, academic, and occupational functioning (Bagge et al., 2004; Grant et al., 2008). BPD commonly co-occurs with a variety of other disorders ranging from unipolar and bipolar mood and anxiety disorders (especially panic and PTSD) to substance-use and eating disorders (Hooley et al., 2012; Pagura et al., 2010). In the past, many clinical researchers hypothesized that BPD had a special relationship with bipolar and recurrent unipolar mood disorders because about 50 percent of those with BPD also quali- fied for a mood disorder diagnosis at some point (Adams et al., 2001; Paris, 2007). However, other personality disorders (such as dependent, avoidant, and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder) are actually more commonly associated with depression than is BPD. Moreover, recent neuroimaging data indicate that BPD individuals show different neural responses to emotional stimuli than do individuals with chronic depression (Hooley et al., 2010). There is also substantial co-occurrence of BPD with other personality disorders—especially histrionic, dependent, antisocial, and schizotypal personality disorders. Nevertheless, Widiger and Trull (1993) noted the following differences in prototypic cases of these personality disorders: “The prototypic borderline’s exploit- ative use of others is usually an angry and impulsive response to disappointment, whereas the antisocial’s is a guiltless and calcu- lated effort for personal gain. Sexuality may play a more central role in the relationships of histrionics than in [those of] border- lines, evident in the histrionic’s tendency to eroticize situations . . . and to be inappropriately seductive. The prototypic schizotypal lacks the emotionality of the borderline, and tends to be more iso- lated, odd and peculiar” (Widiger & Trull, 1993, p. 371). These differences can also be seen using the five-factor model of person- ality disorders (refer back to Table 10.2 on p. 335).  CAuSAl FACtORS   Research suggests that genetic factors play a significant role in the development of BPD (Distel et al., 2009; Livesley, 2008; Skodol, Siever et al., 2002). This heritability may be partly a function of the fact that personality traits of affec- tive instability and impulsivity, which are both very prominent in BPD, are themselves partially heritable (Hooley et al., 2012; Paris, 2007). There is also some preliminary evidence that certain parts of the 5-HTT gene implicated in depression (Chapter 7) may also be associated with BPD (e.g., Lis et al., 2007; Ni et al., 2006). Recent research also suggests a link with other genes in- volved in regulating dopamine transmission (Hooley et al., 2012). There has also been an intense search for the biological sub- strate of BPD. For example, people with BPD often appear to be characterized by lowered functioning of the neurotransmitter serotonin, which is involved in inhibiting behavioral responses. This may be why they show impulsive-aggressive behavior, as in acts of self-mutilation; that is, their serotonergic activity is too low to “put the brakes on” impulsive behavior (e.g., Figueroa & Silk, 1997; Schmahl & Bremner, 2006; Skodol, Siever et al., 2002). Patients with BPD may also show disturbances in the regulation of noradrenergic neurotransmitters that are similar to those seen in chronic stress conditions such as PTSD (see Chapter 5; Hooley, 2008). In particular, their hyperresponsive noradrenergic system may be related to their hypersensitivity to environmental changes (Figueroa & Silk, 1997; Skodol, Siever et al., 2002). Moreover, certain brain areas that ordinarily serve to inhibit aggressive behav- ior when activated by serotonin (such as the orbital prefrontal and medial prefrontal cortex) seem to show decreased activation in BPD (Skodol, Siever et al., 2002; see also Lieb et al., 2004). In addition, research suggests certain structural brain abnormalities in BPD, including reductions in both hippocampal and amyg- dalar volume, features associated with aggression and impulsivity (Hooley et al., 2012). Much theoretical and research attention has also been directed to the role of psychosocial causal factors in BPD. Although the vast majority of this research is retrospective in nature, relying on people’s memories of their past to discover the antecedents of the disorder, two prospective community-based studies have shown that childhood adversity and maltreatment is linked to adult BPD (Johnson et al., 1999; Widom et al., 2009). These studies are consistent with a wealth of retrospective research showing that people with this disorder usually report a large number of negative—even traumatic—events in child- hood. These experiences include abuse and neglect, and sepa- ration and loss. For example, in one large study on abuse and neglect, Zanarini and colleagues (1997) reported on the results of detailed interviews of over 350 patients with BPD and over 100 patients with other personality disorders. Patients with BPD reported significantly higher rates of abuse than did patients with other personality disorders (which were also quite high): emo- tional abuse (73 versus 51 percent), physical abuse (59 versus 34 percent), and sexual abuse (61 versus 32 percent). Overall, about 90 percent of patients with BPD reported some type of
childhood abuse or neglect (emotional, physical, or sexual). (See also Bandelow et al., 2005; Battle et al., 2004.) Although these rates of abuse and neglect seem alarming, remember that the majority of children who experience early abuse and neglect do not end up with any serious personality disorders or other psy- chopathology (see Paris, 1999, 2007; Rutter & Maughan, 1997; see also  2). Although this and many other related studies (see Dolan- Sewell et al., 2001; Paris, 2007) suggest that BPD (and perhaps other personality disorders as well) is often associated with early childhood trauma, most such studies have many shortcom- ings and unfortunately cannot tell us that such early childhood trauma plays a causal role. First, although prospective research to date supports this idea (Johnson et al., 1999; Widom et al., 2009), the majority of evidence comes from retrospective self- reports of individuals who are known for their exaggerated and distorted views of other people (Paris, 1999, 2007; Rutter & Maughan, 1997). Second, childhood abuse is certainly not a specific risk factor for borderline pathology because it is also reported at relatively high rates with some other personality disorders as well as with other disorders such as dissociative identity disorder (see also Chapter 8; Moran et al., 2010). Third, childhood abuse nearly always occurs in families with various other pathological dynamics, such as marital discord and family violence. These factors may be more important than the abuse in the development of BPD (Paris, 1999, 2007). Paris (1999, 2007) offered an interesting multidimensional diathesis-stress theory of BPD. He proposes that people who have high levels of two normal personality traits—impulsivity and affective instability—may have a diathesis to develop BPD, but only in the presence of certain psychological risk factors such as trauma, loss, and parental failure (see Figure 10.1, p. 346). When such nonspecific psychological risk factors occur in someone who is affectively unstable, he or she may become dysphoric and labile and, if he or she is also impulsive, may engage in impulsive act- ing out to cope with this negative mood. Thus the dysphoria and impulsive acts fuel each other. In addition, Paris proposes that children who are impulsive and unstable tend to be “difficult” or troublesome children. They may therefore be at increased risk for being rejected or abused. Moreover, if the parents themselves have personality pathology, they may be especially insensitive to their difficult child, leading to a vicious cycle in which the child’s prob- lems are exacerbated by inadequate parenting, which in turn leads to increased dysphoria, and so on. Paris further suggests that BPD may be more prevalent in our society than in many other cultures, and more prevalent today than in the past, because of the weaken- ing of the family structure in our society.  Cluster C Personality Disorders  People with Cluster C personality disorders often show anxiety and fearfulness. These are characteristics that we do not see in the other two clusters. In the following section, we examine avoidant, dependent, and obsessive-compulsive personality disorders.  Avoidant Personality Disorder  Individuals with   avoidant personality disorder   show extreme social inhibition and introversion, leading to lifelong pat- terns of limited social relationships and reluctance to enter into social interactions. Because of their hypersensitivity to, and fear of, criticism and rebuff, they do not seek out other people, yet they desire affection and are often lonely and bored. Unlike schizoid personalities, people with avoidant personality disorder do not enjoy their aloneness; their inability to relate comfortably to other people causes acute anxiety and is accom- panied by low self-esteem and excessive self-consciousness, which in turn are often associated with depression (Grant, Hasin et al., 2005; Sanislow et al., 2012). Feeling inept and socially inadequate are the two most prevalent and stable fea- tures of avoidant personality disorder (McGlashan et al., 2005).  Many studies have shown that people with borderline personality disor- der report a large number of negative, even traumatic, events in child- hood. These include abuse and neglect, and separation and loss.
In addition, researchers have documented that individuals with this disorder also show more generalized timidity and avoid- ance of many novel situations and emotions (including positive emotions), and show deficits in their ability to experience plea- sure as well (Taylor et al., 2004).  The Avoidant Librarian   Sally, a 35-year-old librarian, lived a relatively isolated life and had few acquaintances and no close personal friends. From childhood on, she had been very shy and had withdrawn from close ties with others to keep from being hurt or criticized. Two years before she entered therapy, she had had a date to go to a party with an acquaintance she had met at the library. The moment they had arrived at the party, Sally had felt extremely uncomfortable because she had not been “dressed properly.” She left in a hurry and refused to see her acquaintance again. In the early treatment sessions, she sat silently much of the time, finding it too difficult to talk about herself. After several sessions, she grew to trust the therapist, and she related numer- ous incidents in her early years in which she had been “devas- tated” by her alcoholic father’s obnoxious behavior in public. Although she had tried to keep her school friends from knowing about her family problems, when this had become impossible, she instead had limited her friendships, thus protecting herself from possible embarrassment or criticism. When Sally first began therapy, she avoided meeting people unless she could be assured that they would “like her.” With therapy that focused on enhancing her assertiveness and social skills, she made some progress in her ability to approach people and talk with them.  The key difference between the loner with schizoid personal- ity disorder and the loner who is avoidant is that the latter is shy, insecure, and hypersensitive to criticism, whereas someone with a schizoid personality is more aloof, cold, and relatively indifferent to criticism (Millon & Martinez, 1995). The person with avoid- ant personality also desires interpersonal contact but avoids it for fear of rejection, whereas in schizoid personality disorder there is a lack of desire or ability to form social relationships. A less clear distinction is that between avoidant personality disorder and generalized social phobia (Chapter 6). Numerous studies have  A pervasive pattern of social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to negative evaluation, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the following:  1.   Avoids occupational activities that involve significant inter- personal contact because of fears of criticism, disapproval, or rejection.  2.   Is unwilling to get involved with people unless certain of being liked.  3.   Shows restraint within intimate relationships because of the fear of being shamed or ridiculed.  4.   Is preoccupied with being criticized or rejected in social situations.  5.   Is inhibited in new interpersonal situations because of feelings of inadequacy.  6.   Views self as socially inept, personally unappealing, or inferior to others.  7.   Is unusually reluctant to take personal risks or to engage in any new activities because they may prove embarrassing. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Fifth Edition, (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Avoidant Personality Disorder   DSM-5  Borderline Personality Disorder  Genetic and Biological Vulnerabilities  Affective Instability   Impulsivity  Plus  Trauma  Loss and/or Rejection  Parental Psychopathology and/or Failure and/or and/or  Dysphoria and Emotional Lability Impulsive Acting Out and Chaotic Interpersonal Relationships Personality Traits as Diathesis Nonspecific Psychological Environmental Risk Factors Emotions and Behavior Personality Disorder  figure   10.1  Multidimensional Diathesis-Stress Theory of Borderline Personality Disorder .  Source: Paris (1999).
found substantial overlap between these two disorders, leading some investigators to conclude that avoidant personality disorder may simply be a somewhat more severe manifestation of gen- eralized social phobia (Alpert et al., 1997; Carter & Wu, 2010; Tillfors et al., 2004) that does not warrant a separate diagnosis (Chambless et al., 2008). This is consistent with the finding that there are cases of generalized social phobia without avoidant per- sonality disorder but very few cases of avoidant personality dis- order without generalized social phobia. Somewhat higher levels of dysfunction and distress are also found in the individuals with avoidant personality disorder, including more consistent feelings of low self-esteem (Millon & Martinez, 1995; Hummelen et al., 2007; Tillfors et al., 2004).  CAuSAl FACtORS   Some research suggests that avoidant per- sonality may have its origins in an innate “inhibited” tempera- ment that leaves the infant and child shy and inhibited in novel and ambiguous situations. A large twin study in Norway has shown that traits prominent in avoidant personality disorder show a modest genetic influence (Reichborn-Kjennerud et al., 2006), and that the genetic vulnerability for avoidant personal- ity disorder is at least partially shared with that for social phobia (Reichborn-Kjennerud et al., 2007). Moreover, there is also evidence that the fear of being negatively evaluated, which is prominent in avoidant personality disorder, is moderately heri- table (Stein et al., 2002); introversion and neuroticism are also both elevated (refer back to Table 10.2 on p. 335), and they too are moderately heritable. This genetically and biologically based inhibited temperament may often serve as the diathesis that leads to avoidant personality disorder in some children who experience emotional abuse, rejection, or humiliation from parents who are not particularly affectionate (Alden et al., 2002; Bernstein & Travaglini, 1999; Kagan, 1997). Such abuse and rejection would be especially likely to lead to anxious and fear- ful attachment patterns in temperamentally inhibited children (Bartholomew et al., 2001).  Dependent Personality Disorder  Individuals with   dependent personality disorder   show an extreme need to be taken care of, which leads to clinging and submissive behavior. They also show acute fear at the possibility of separation or sometimes of simply having to be alone because they see themselves as inept (Bornstein, 2007, 2012; Widiger & Bornstein, 2001). These individuals usually build their lives around other people and subordinate their own needs and views to keep these people involved with them. Accordingly, they may be indiscriminate in their selection of mates. They often fail to get appropriately angry with others because of a fear of losing their support, which means that people with dependent per- sonalities may remain in psychologically or physically abusive relationships. They have great difficulty making even simple, everyday decisions without a great deal of advice and reassurance because they lack self-confidence and feel helpless even when they have actually developed good work skills or other compe- tencies. They may function well as long as they are not required to be on their own.  The Dependent Wife   Sarah, a 32-year-old mother of two and a part-time tax accountant, came to a crisis center late one evening after Michael, her husband of a year and a half, had abused her physically and then left home. Although he never physically harmed the children, he frequently threatened to do so when he was drunk. Sarah appeared acutely anxious and worried about the future and “needed to be told what to do.” She wanted her husband to come back and seemed rather uncon- cerned about his regular pattern of physical abuse. At the time, Michael was an unemployed resident in a day treatment program at a halfway house for paroled drug abusers. He was almost always in a surly mood and “ready to explode.” Although Sarah had a well-paying job, she voiced great concern about being able to make it on her own. She realized that it was foolish to be “dependent” on her husband, whom she referred to as a “real loser.” (She had had a similar relation- ship with her first husband, who had left her and her oldest child when she was 18.) Several times in the past few months, Sarah had made up her mind to get out of the marriage but couldn’t bring herself to break away. She would threaten to leave, but when the time came to do so, she would “freeze in the door” with a numbness in her body and a sinking feeling in her stomach at the thought of “not being with Michael.”  Estimates are that dependent personality disorder occurs in 1 to 2 percent of the population and is more common in women than in men (Bornstein, 2012). This gender difference is not due to a sex bias in making the diagnosis but rather to the higher prevalence in women of certain personality traits such as neuroti- cism and agreeableness, which are prominent in dependent per- sonality disorder (Lynam & Widiger, 2007). It is quite common  The person with avoidant personality desires social contact but avoids it because of a fear of rejection.
for people with dependent personality disorder to have a comor- bid diagnosis of mood and anxiety disorders (Bornstein, 1999; Grant, Hasin et al., 2005), as well as eating disorders (Bornstein, 2012). Some features of dependent personality disorder overlap with those of borderline, histrionic, and avoidant personality disorders, but there are differences as well (refer back to Table 10.2 on p. 335). For example, both borderline personalities and depen- dent personalities fear abandonment. However, the borderline personality, who usually has intense and stormy relationships, reacts with feelings of emptiness or rage if abandonment occurs, whereas the dependent personality reacts initially with submis- siveness and appeasement and then finally with an urgent seek- ing of a new relationship. Histrionic and dependent personalities both have strong needs for reassurance and approval, but the histrionic personality is much more gregarious, flamboyant, and actively demanding of attention, whereas the dependent personality is more docile and self-effacing. It can also be hard to distinguish between dependent and avoidant personalities. As noted, dependent personalities have great difficulty separating in relationships because they feel incompetent on their own and have a need to be taken care of, whereas avoidant personalities have trouble initiating relationships because they fear criticism or rejection, which will be humiliating (Millon & Martinez, 1995). Even so, we should remember that avoidant personality occurs with dependent personality disorder rather frequently (Alden et al., 2002; Arntz et al., 2009; Bernstein & Travaglini, 1999; Bornstein, 2011). This fits with the observation that people with avoidant personality disorder do not avoid absolutely everyone and that their dependent personality disorder characteristics are focused on the one or few individuals whom they do not avoid (Alden et al., 2002). In terms of the five-factor model, dependent personality disorder is associated with high levels of neuroticism and agreeableness (Lowe et al., 2009).  CAuSAl FACtORS   Some evidence indicates that there is a modest genetic influence on dependent personality traits (Born- stein, 2011, 2012; Reichborn-Kjennerud et al., 2006). More- over, several other personality traits such as neuroticism and agreeableness that are also prominent in dependent personality disorder also have a genetic component (Widiger & Bornstein, 2001). It is possible that people with these partially genetically based predispositions to dependence and anxiousness may be especially prone to the adverse effects of parents who are au- thoritarian and overprotective (not promoting autonomy and individuation in their child but instead reinforcing dependent behavior). This might lead children to believe that they are reli- ant on others for their own well-being and are incompetent on their own (Widiger & Bornstein, 2001). Cognitive theorists describe the underlying maladaptive schemas for these individu- als as involving core beliefs about weakness and competence and needing others to survive (P. S. Rasmussen, 2005), such as, “I am completely helpless” and “I can function only if I have access to somebody competent” (Beck et al., 1990, p. 60; Beck et al., 2003). Recent experimental evidence supports the hypothesis that these beliefs characterize those with dependent personality disorder (Arntz et al., 2011).  Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder  Perfectionism and an excessive concern with maintaining order and control characterize individuals with   obsessive-compulsive personality disorder (OCPD) . Their preoccupation with main- taining mental and interpersonal control occurs in part through careful attention to rules, order, and schedules. They are very  A pervasive and excessive need to be taken care of that leads to submissive and clinging behavior and fears of separation, begin- ning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:  1.   Has difficulty making everyday decisions without an excessive amount of advice and reassurance from others.  2.   Needs others to assume responsibility for most major areas of his or her life.  3.   Has difficulty expressing disagreement with others because of fear of loss of support or approval. ( Note:   Do not include real- istic fears of retribution.)  4.   Has difficulty initiating projects or doing things on his or her own (because of a lack of self-confidence in judgment or abili- ties rather than a lack of motivation or energy).  5.   Goes to excessive lengths to obtain nurturance and support from others, to the point of volunteering to do things that are unpleasant.  6.   Feels uncomfortable or helpless when alone because of exag- gerated fears of being unable to care for himself or herself.  7.   Urgently seeks another relationship as a source of care and support when a close relationship ends.  8.   Is unrealistically preoccupied with fears of being left to take care of himself or herself. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Fifth Edition, (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Dependent Personality Disorder   DSM-5
careful in what they do so as not to make mistakes, but because the details they are preoccupied with are often trivial they use their time poorly and have a difficult time seeing the larger picture (Aycicegi-Dinn et al., 2009; Yovel et al., 2005). This per- fectionism is also often quite dysfunctional in that it can result in their never finishing projects. They also tend to be devoted to work to the exclusion of leisure activities and may have difficulty relaxing or doing anything just for fun (Widiger & Frances, 1994). At an interpersonal level, they have difficulty delegating tasks to others and are quite rigid, stubborn, and cold, which is how others tend to view them. Research indicates that rigidity, stubbornness, and perfectionism, as well as reluctance to delegate, are the most prevalent and stable features of OCPD (Ansell et al., 2008; Grilo et al., 2004; McGlashan et al., 2005; Samuel & Widiger, 2011). It is important to note that people with OCPD do not have true obsessions or compulsive rituals that are the source of extreme anxiety or distress in people with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD; see Chapter 6). Instead, people with OCPD have lifestyles characterized by overconscientiousness, high neu- roticism, inflexibility, and perfectionism but without the pres- ence of true obsessions or compulsive rituals (Samuels & Costa, 2012). Indeed, only about 20 percent of patients with OCD have a comorbid diagnosis of OCPD. This is not significantly different from the rate of OCPD in patients with panic disorder (Albert et al., 2004). People with OCD are more likely to be diagnosed with avoidant or dependent personality disorder than with OCPD (Wu et al., 2006), and there are only three symp- toms of OCPD that seem to occur at elevated rates in people with OCD relative to controls: perfectionism, preoccupation with details, and hoarding (Eisen et al., 2006).  The Perfectionist Train Dispatcher   Alan appeared to be well suited to his work as a train dispatcher. He was consci- entious, perfectionistic, and attended to minute details. However, he was not close to his coworkers, and they reportedly thought him “off.” He would get quite upset if even minor varia- tions to his daily routine occurred. For example, he would become tense and irritable if coworkers did not follow exactly his elaborately constructed schedules and plans.  Individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder are highly per- fectionistic, leading to serious problems finishing various projects. They are also excessively devoted to work, inflexible about moral and ethical issues, and have difficulty delegating tasks to others. They are also in- clined to be ungenerous with themselves and others.  A pervasive pattern of preoccupation with orderliness, perfec- tionism, and mental and interpersonal control, at the expense of flexibility, openness, and efficiency, beginning by early adult- hood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the following:  1.   Is preoccupied with details, rules, lists, order, organization, or schedules to the extent that the major point of the activity is lost.  2.   Shows perfectionism that interferes with task completion (e.g., is unable to complete a project because his or her own overly strict standards are not met).  3.   Is excessively devoted to work and productivity to the exclu- sion of leisure activities and friendships (not accounted for by obvious economic necessity).  4.   Is overconscientious, scrupulous, and inflexible about matters of morality, ethics, or values (not accounted for by cultural or religious identification).  5.   Is unable to discard worn-out or worthless objects even when they have no sentimental value.  6.   Is reluctant to delegate tasks or to work with others unless they submit to exactly his or her way of doing things.  7.   Adopts a miserly spending style toward both self and oth- ers; money is viewed as something to be hoarded for future catastrophes.  8.   Shows rigidity and stubbornness. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Fifth Edition, (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder   DSM-5
In short, Alan got little pleasure out of life and worried con- stantly about minor problems. His rigid routines were impossible to maintain, and he often developed tension headaches or stom- achaches when he couldn’t keep his complicated plans in order. His physician, noting the frequency of his physical complaints and his generally perfectionistic approach to life, referred him for a psychological evaluation. Psychotherapy was recommended, but he did not follow up on the treatment recommendations because he felt that he could not afford the time away from work.  Some features of OCPD overlap with some features of narcis- sistic, antisocial, and schizoid personality disorders, although there are also distinguishing features. For example, individuals with narcissistic and ASPDs may share the lack of generosity toward others that characterizes OCPD, but the former tend to indulge themselves, whereas those with OCPD are equally unwilling to be generous with themselves. In addition, both the schizoid and the obsessive-compulsive personalities may have a certain amount of formality and social detachment, but only the schizoid personality lacks the capacity for close relationships. The person with OCPD has difficulty in interpersonal relationships because of excessive devotion to work and great difficulty expressing emotions.  Causal FaCtors   Theorists who take a five-factor dimen- sional approach to understanding OCPD note that these indi- viduals have excessively high levels of conscientiousness (Samuel & Widiger, 2011). This leads to extreme devotion to work, perfectionism, and excessive controlling behavior (McCann, 1999). They are also high on assertiveness (a facet of extraver- sion) and low on compliance (a facet of agreeableness). (Refer back to Table 10.2 on p. 335.) Another influential biological dimensional approach—that of Cloninger (1987)—posits three primary dimensions of personality: novelty seeking, reward dependence, and harm avoidance. Individuals with obsessive- compulsive personalities have low levels of novelty seeking (i.e., they avoid change) and reward dependence (i.e., they work ex- cessively at the expense of pleasurable pursuits) but high levels of harm avoidance (i.e., they respond strongly to aversive stimuli and try to avoid them). Recent research has also demonstrated that the OCPD traits show a modest genetic influence (Calvo et al., 2009; Reichborn-Kjennerud et al., 2006).  General Sociocultural Causal Factors for Personality Disorders  The sociocultural factors that contribute to personality disorders are not well understood. As with other forms of psychopathol- ogy, the incidence and particular features of personality disorders vary somewhat with time and place, although not as much as one might guess (Allik, 2005; Rigozzi et al., 2009). Indeed, there is less variance across cultures than within cultures. This may be related to findings that all cultures (both Western and non-Western, including Africa and Asia) share the same five basic personality traits discussed earlier, and their patterns of covaria- tion also seem universal (see Allik, 2005, for a review). Some researchers believe that certain personality disorders have increased in American society in recent years (e.g., Paris, 2001). If this claim is true, we can expect to find the increase related to changes in our culture’s general priorities and activi- ties. Is our emphasis on impulse gratification, instant solutions, and pain-free benefits leading more people to develop the self- centered lifestyles that we see in more extreme forms of the personality disorders? For example, there is some evidence that narcissistic personality disorder is more common in Western cul- tures, where personal ambition and success are encouraged and reinforced (e.g., Widiger & Bornstein, 2001). There is also some evidence that histrionic personality might be expected to be (and is) less common in Asian cultures, where sexual seductiveness and drawing attention to oneself are frowned on; by contrast, it may be higher in Hispanic cultures, where such tendencies are common and well tolerated (e.g., Bornstein, 1999). Within the United States, rates of BPD are higher in Hispanic Americans than in African Americans and Caucasians, but rates of schizo- typal personality disorder are higher in African Americans than in Caucasians (Chavira et al., 2003). It has also been suggested that known increases over the 60 years since World War II in emotional dysregulation (e.g., depression, self-injurious behavior, and suicide) and impul- sive behaviors (substance abuse and criminal behavior) may be related to increases in the prevalence of borderline and ASPDs over the same time period. This could stem from increased breakdown of the family and other traditional social structures (Paris, 2001, 2007) and may vary across cultures depending on whether similar breakdowns have occurred.  in review  •   What are the general characteristics of the three clusters of personality disorders?  •   Describe and differentiate among the following Cluster A personality disorders: paranoid, schizoid, and schizotypal.  •   Describe and differentiate among the following Cluster B personality disorders: histrionic, narcissistic, antisocial, and borderline.  •   Describe and differentiate among the following Cluster C personality disorders: avoidant, dependent, and obsessive- compulsive.  Treatments and Outcomes for Personality Disorders  Personality disorders are generally very difficult to treat, in part because they are, by definition, relatively enduring, pervasive, and inflexible patterns of behavior and inner experience. More- over, many different goals of treatment can be formulated, and some are more difficult to achieve than others. Goals might
include reducing subjective distress, changing specific dysfunc- tional behaviors, and changing whole patterns of behavior or the entire structure of the personality. In many cases, people with personality disorders enter treat- ment only at someone else’s insistence, and they often do not believe that they need to change. Moreover, those from the odd/ eccentric Cluster A and the erratic/dramatic Cluster B have gen- eral difficulties in forming and maintaining good relationships, including with a therapist. For those from the erratic/dramatic Cluster B, the pattern of acting out typical in their other rela- tionships is carried into the therapy situation, and instead of dealing with their problems at the verbal level they may become angry at their therapist and loudly disrupt the sessions. Non- completion of treatment is a particular problem in the treatment of personality disorders; a recent review of the research reported that an average of 37 percent of personality disorder patients drop out of therapy prematurely (McMurran et al., 2010). In addition, people who have a personality disorder in addi- tion to another disorder (such as depression or an eating disor- der) do not, on average, do as well in treatment for their other disorder as do patients without comorbid personality disorders (Crits-Christoph & Barber, 2002, 2007; Pilkonis, 2001). This is partly because people with personality disorders have rigid, ingrained personality traits that often lead to poor therapeutic relationships and additionally make them resist doing the things that would help improve their other conditions.  Adapting therapeutic techniques to Specific Personality Disorders  Therapeutic techniques must often be modified. For example, recognizing that traditional individual psychotherapy tends to encourage dependence in people who are already too dependent (as in dependent, histrionic, and BPDs), it is often useful to develop treatment strategies specifically aimed at altering these traits. Patients from the anxious/fearful Cluster C, such as those with dependent and avoidant personalities, may also be hyper- sensitive to any criticism they may perceive from the therapist, so therapists need to be extremely careful to make sure that they do not come across in this way. For people with severe personality disorders, therapy may be more effective in situations where acting-out behavior can be constrained. For example, many patients with BPD are hospital- ized at times, for safety reasons, because of their frequent suicidal behavior. However, partial-hospitalization programs are increas- ingly being used as an intermediate and less expensive alternative to inpatient treatment (Azim, 2001). In these programs, patients live at home and receive extensive group treatment and rehabili- tation only during weekdays. Several studies conducted in the Netherlands suggest that short-term inpatient treatment is more effective than outpatient treatment in both Cluster B and Cluster C personality disorders (Bartak et al., 2010, 2011). Specific therapeutic techniques are a central part of the relatively new cognitive approach to personality disorders that assumes that the dysfunctional feelings and behavior associated with the personality disorders are largely the result of schemas that tend to produce consistently biased judgments, as well as tendencies to make cognitive errors (e.g., Beck et al., 2003; Cottraux & Blackburn, 2001; Leahy & McGinn, 2012; Pretzer & Beck, 2005). Changing these underlying dysfunctional schemas is difficult but is at the heart of cognitive therapy for personality disorders. Such an approach uses standard cognitive techniques of monitoring automatic thoughts, challenging faulty logic, and assigning behavioral tasks in an effort to challenge the patient’s dysfunctional beliefs.  treating Borderline Personality Disorder  Of all personality disorders, most clinical and research attention has been paid to the treatment of BPD. This is due to the sever- ity of this disorder and the high risk of suicide that is associated with it. Treatment often involves both psychological and biologi- cal treatment approaches, with medications being used as an adjunct to psychological treatment, which is considered essential.  BIOlOGICAl tREAtMENtS   The use of medications is con- troversial with this disorder because it is so frequently associated with suicidal behavior. Today, antidepressant medications (most often from the SSRI category) are considered most safe and use- ful for treating rapid mood shifts, anger, and anxiety (Lieb et al., 2004), as well as for impulsivity symptoms including impulsive aggression such as self-mutilation (Koenigsberg et al., 2002, 2007; Markovitz, 2004; Silk & Feurino, 2012). In addition, low doses of antipsychotic medication (see Chapters 13 and 16) have modest effects that are broad based; that is, patients show some improvement in depression, anxiety, suicidality, impulsive aggression, rejection sensitivity, and especially transient psychotic symptoms and cognitive and perceptual distortions (Koenigsberg et al., 2007; Markovitz, 2001, 2004; Silk & Feurino, 2012). Finally, mood-stabilizing medications such as carbazemine may be useful in reducing irritability, suicidality, affective instability and impulsive aggressive behavior (Koenigsberg et al., 2007; Lieb et al., 2004). However, the consensus to date is that drugs are only mildly beneficial for BPD (Paris, 2009).  PSyCHOSOCIAl tREAtMENtS   Clinical trials suggest that several types of psychotherapy may be effective for BPD. As discussed below, however, these treatments share two common weaknesses. These are their relative complexity and long dura- tion, both of which makes them difficult to disseminate to the broader population (Paris, 2009).  Dialectical behavior therapy , developed by Marsha Linehan, is a unique kind of cognitive and behavioral therapy specifically adapted for BPD (Linehan, 1993; Linehan & Dexter-Mazza, 2008; Lynch & Cuper, 2012; Robins et al., 2001). Linehan believes that patients’ inability to tolerate strong states of negative affect is central to this disorder. One of the primary goals of treatment is to encourage patients to accept
this negative affect without engaging in self-destructive or other maladaptive behaviors. Accordingly, Linehan has developed a problem-focused treatment based on a clear hierarchy of goals, which prioritizes decreasing suicidal and self-harming behavior and increasing coping skills. The therapy combines individual and group components as well as phone coaching. In the group setting, patients learn interpersonal effectiveness, emotion regu- lation, and distress tolerance skills. The individual therapist, in turn, uses therapy sessions and phone coaching to help the patient identify and change problematic behavior patterns and apply newly learned skills effectively. Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) appears to be an effica- cious treatment for BPD (Binks et al., 2006; Paris, 2009). How- ever, there are still not enough randomized controlled trials to say whether it works as well in men as in women, and whether it works well with minority patients (Lynch & Cuper, 2012). Patients receiving DBT show reductions in self-destructive and suicidal behaviors as well as in levels of anger (Linehan et al., 2006; Lynch et al., 2007). Evidence also suggests that these gains are sustainable (Zanarini et al., 2005). Such results are consid- ered extraordinary by most therapists who work with this popula- tion, and many psychodynamic therapists are now incorporating important components of this treatment into their own treat- ment. However, DBT is still not in widespread use, likely because the treatment is complex and lasts several years (Paris, 2009). Accordingly, some researchers are currently working on develop- ing briefer versions of the treatment (Stanley et al., 2007). Other psychosocial treatments for BPD involve variants of psychodynamic psychotherapy adapted for the particular prob- lems of people with this disorder. For example, Kernberg (1985, 1996) and colleagues (Koenigsberg et al., 2000; see also Clarkin et al., 2004) have developed a form of psychodynamic psycho- therapy that is much more directive than is typical of psychody- namic treatment. The primary goal is seen as strengthening the weak egos of these individuals, with a particular focus on their primary primitive defense mechanism of splitting. This leads them to black-and-white, all-or-none thinking, as well as to rapid shifts in their reactions to themselves and to other people (includ- ing the therapist) as “all good” or “all bad.” One major goal is to help patients see the shades of gray between these extremes and integrate positive and negative views of themselves and others into more nuanced views. Although this treatment is often expen- sive and time-consuming (often lasting a number of years), it has been shown in at least one study to be as effective as DBT, which is now regarded as the most established, effective treatment (Clarkin et al., 2007). Such results will, however, need to be replicated in other treatment centers before we can place a great deal of confidence in its usefulness (Clarkin et al., 2004; Crits- Christoph & Barber, 2002, 2007). Finally, we note that there is one other promising treatment approach that deserves mention. Bateman and Fonagy have devel- oped a new therapeutic approach called mentalization (see Bate- man & Fonagy, 2010). This uses the therapeutic relationship to help patients develop the skills they need to accurately understand their own feelings and emotions, as well as the feelings and emo- tions of others. Randomized controlled trials of mentalization-based therapy have revealed it to be an efficacious treatment for BPD. Moreover, many clinical improvements seem to be maintained even after an 8-year follow-up (Bateman & Fonagy, 2008). Although DBT is still a very popular treatment, it is encouraging that people with BPD now have other treatment options available to them.  treating Other Personality Disorders  Treatment of Cluster A and other Cluster B personality disorders is not, so far, as promising as some of the recent advances that have been made in the treatment of BPD. In schizotypal personality disorder, low doses of antipsychotic drugs (including the newer, atypical antipsychotics; e.g., Keshavan et al., 2004; Koenigsberg et al., 2007; Raine, 2006) may result in modest improvements. Antidepressants from the SSRI category may also be useful. How- ever, no treatment has yet produced anything approaching a cure for most people with this disorder (Koenigsberg et al., 2002, 2007; Markovitz, 2001, 2004; Silk & Ferino, 2012). Other than uncon- trolled studies or single cases, no systematic, controlled studies of treating people with either medication or psychotherapy yet exist for paranoid, schizoid, narcissistic, or histrionic disorder (Beck et al., 2003; Crits-Christoph & Barber, 2007). One reason for this is that these people (because of the nature of their personality pathology) rarely seek treatment. Although not extensively studied, treatment of some Cluster C disorders, such as dependent and avoidant personality dis- order, appears somewhat more promising. Winston and col- leagues (1994) found significant improvement in patients with Cluster C disorders using a form of short-term psychotherapy that is active and confrontational (see also Pretzer & Beck, 1996). Several studies using cognitive-behavioral treatment with avoidant personality disorder have also reported signifi- cant gains (see Crits-Christoph & Barber, 2007), and a recent meta-analysis concluded both cognitive-behavioral and psy- chodynamic therapies resulted in significant and lasting treat- ment gains (Simon, 2009). Another study in the Netherlands concluded that short-term inpatient treatment for Cluster C personality disorders is even more effective than long-term inpatient or outpatient therapy (Bartak et al., 2011). Antide- pressants from the MAOI and SSRI categories may also some- times help in the treatment of avoidant personality disorder, just as they do in closely related social phobia (Koenigsberg et al., 2007; Markovitz, 2001).  in review  •   Why are personality disorders especially resistant to therapy?  •   Under what circumstances do individuals with personality disor- ders generally get involved in psychotherapy?  •   What is known about the effectiveness of treatments for border- line personality disorder?
Antisocial Personality Disorder and Psychopathy  The outstanding characteristic of people with   antisocial person- ality disorder (ASPD)   is their tendency to persistently disregard and violate the rights of others. They do this through a combi- nation of deceitful, aggressive, and antisocial behaviors. These people have a lifelong pattern of unsocialized and irresponsible behavior with little regard for safety—either their own or that of others. These characteristics bring them into repeated conflict with society, and a high proportion become incarcerated. Only individuals 18 or over are diagnosed with ASPD. According to the   DSM , this diagnosis is made if, after age 15, the person repeatedly performs acts that are grounds for arrest; shows repeated deceitfulness, impulsivity, irritability, and aggressive- ness; shows disregard for safety; and shows consistent irrespon- sibility in work or financial matters. Moreover, the person must also have shown symptoms of conduct disorder before age 15 (see  5).  Psychopathy and Antisocial Personality Disorder  The use of the term antisocial personality disorder dates back only to 1980 when personality disorders first entered  DSM-III.   However, many of the central features of this disorder have long been labeled   psychopathy   or sociopathy. Although several investigators identified the syndrome in the nineteenth century using such terms as “moral insanity” (Prichard, 1835), the most comprehensive early description of psychopathy was made by Cleckley (1941, 1982) in the 1940s. In addition to the defining features noted in the   DSM   criteria, psychopathy also includes such affective and interpersonal traits as lack of empa- thy, inflated and arrogant self-appraisal, and glib and superficial charm (see Patrick, 2006, for an analysis of Cleckley’s work in light of contemporary research). With their strong emphasis on behavioral criteria that can be measured reasonably objectively, the features included in the   DSM   do not fully map onto the construct of psychopathy as originally described. This was done deliberately in an attempt to increase the reliability of the diag- nosis (i.e., the level of agreement of clinicians on the diagnosis). However, much less attention has been paid to the validity of the ASPD diagnosis—that is, whether it measures a meaningful con- struct and whether that construct is the same as psychopathy. According to some estimates, the prevalence of ASPD in the general population is about 3 percent for males and about 1 per- cent for females but other studies have reported that the prepon- derance of men is even greater such as 5 to 1 (Hare et al., 2012). However, a recent, very large epidemiological study has shown that the real prevalence may be as low as 1 percent (Lenzenweger et al., 2007). There are no epidemiological studies estimating the prevalence of psychopathy, but Hare et al., (1999) estimated it is likely to be about 1 percent in North America.  tWO DIMENSIONS OF PSyCHOPAtHy   Research suggests that ASPD and psychopathy are related but differ in significant ways. Robert Hare (1980, 1991, 2003) developed a 20-item Psy- chopathy Checklist-Revised (PCL-R) as a way for clinicians and researchers to diagnose psychopathy on the basis of the Cleckley criteria following an extensive interview and careful checking of past school, police, and prison records. Extensive research with this checklist has shown that there are two related but separable dimensions of psychopathy, each predicting different types of behavior: 1. The first dimension involves the affective and interper- sonal core of the disorder and reflects traits such as lack of remorse or guilt, callousness/lack of empathy, glibness/ superficial charm, grandiose sense of self-worth, and path- ological lying.  A.   A pervasive pattern of disregard for and violation of the rights of others, occurring since age 15 years, as indicated by three (or more) of the following:  1.   Failure to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behaviors, as indicated by repeatedly performing acts that are grounds for arrest.  2.   Deceitfulness, as indicated by repeated lying, use of aliases, or conning others for personal profit or pleasure.  3.   Impulsivity or failure to plan ahead.  4.   Irritability and aggressiveness, as indicated by repeated physical fights or assaults.  5.   Reckless disregard for safety of self or others.  6.   Consistent irresponsibility, as indicated by repeated failure to sustain consistent work behavior or honor financial obligations.  7.   Lack of remorse, as indicated by being indifferent to or rationalizing having hurt, mistreated, or stolen from another.  B.   The individual is at least age 18 years.  C.   There is evidence of conduct disorder with onset before age 15 years.  D.   The occurrence of antisocial behavior is not exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Fifth Edition, (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Antisocial Personality Disorder   DSM-5
2. The second dimension reflects behavior—the aspects of psychopathy that involve antisocial or impulsive acts, social deviance, as well as a need for stimulation, poor behavior controls, irresponsibility, and a parasitic lifestyle. The second dimension is much more closely related than the first to the   DSM   diagnosis of ASPD (Hare et al., 1999; Widiger, 2006). Not surprisingly, therefore, when comparisons have been made in prison settings to determine what percentage of prison inmates qualify for a diagnosis of psychopathy versus ASPD, it is typically found that about 70 to 80 percent qualify for a diag- nosis of ASPD but that only about 25 to 30 percent meet the criteria for psychopathy (Patrick, 2005). Put somewhat differ- ently, only about half of imprisoned individuals diagnosed with ASPD also meet the criteria for psychopathy, but most impris- oned individuals with a diagnosis of psychopathy also meet the criteria for ASPD (Widiger, 2006). That is, a significant number of inmates show the antisocial and aggressive behaviors necessary for a diagnosis of ASPD but do not show enough selfish, callous, and exploitative behaviors to qualify for a diagnosis of psychopa- thy (Hare et al., 1999). The issues surrounding these diagnoses remain highly con- troversial. There was considerable discussion by the   DSM-5   task force about expanding the   DSM-IV   criteria for ASPD to include more of the traditional affective and interpersonal features of psychopathy. However, in the end no official changes were made. An alternative approach to the diagnosis of ASPD appears in Section III of the   DSM-5   manual and is considered to be in need of further study. Many researchers continue to use the Cleckley/ Hare psychopathy diagnosis rather than the   DSM   ASPD diag- nosis, not only because of the long and rich research tradition on psychopathy but also because the psychopathy diagnosis has been shown to be a better predictor of a variety of important facets of criminal behavior than the ASPD diagnosis (Hare et al., 2012). Overall, a diagnosis of psychopathy appears to be the single best predictor of violence and recidivism (offending again after impris- onment; Douglas et al., 2006; Gretton et al., 2004; Hart, 1998). For example, one review estimated that people with psychopathy are three times more likely to reoffend and four times more likely to reoffend violently following prison terms than are people with- out a psychopathy diagnosis (Hemphill et al., 1998). Moreover, as illustrated in Figure 10.2, adolescents with higher psychopathy scores are not only more likely to show violent reoffending but are also more likely to reoffend more quickly (Gretton et al., 2004). An additional concern about the current conceptualization of ASPD is that it fails to include people who show many of the features of the first, affective and interpersonal dimension of psychopathy but not as many features of the second, antisocial dimension, or at least few enough that these individuals do not generally get into trouble with the law. Cleckley did not believe that aggressive behavior was central to the concept of psychopa- thy (Patrick, 2006). This group might include, for example, unprincipled and predatory business or financial professionals, manipulative lawyers, high-pressure evangelists, and crooked politicians (Hall & Benning, 2006; Hare et al., 1999). Unfortu- nately, because they are difficult to find to study, little research has been conducted on psychopathic people who manage to stay out of correctional institutions. To locate these people, one researcher (Widom, 1977) who wanted to study them ran an ingenious ad in local newspapers:  Are you adventurous? Psychologist studying adventurous, care- free people who’ve led exciting, impulsive lives. If you’re the kind of person who’d do almost anything for a dare and want to participate in a paid experiment, send name, address, phone, and short biography proving how interesting you are to . . . (p. 675)  When those who responded were given a battery of tests, they turned out to be similar in personality makeup to that of institutionalized psychopaths. Several further studies on people with noncriminal psychopathy confirmed this finding (Hall & Benning, 2006; Hare et al., 1999). However, some experimental research that we will discuss later suggests that these two groups may also differ biologically in some significant ways (Ishikawa et al., 2001). These controversies over the use of a diagnosis of psychopathy versus ASPD are not likely to be resolved soon. Different research- ers in this area make different choices, so interpreting the research on causal factors can be difficult. Because the causal factors are almost certainly not identical, we make every effort to make it clear which diagnostic category was used in different studies.  the Clinical Picture in Psychopathy and Antisocial Personality Disorder  Often charming, spontaneous, and likable on first acquaintance, psychopaths are deceitful and manipulative, callously using oth- ers to achieve their own ends. Many of them seem to live in a series of present moments without consideration for the past or future. But also included in this general category are hostile people who are prone to acting out impulses in remorseless and often senselessly violent ways. We will summarize the major characteristics of psycho- paths and antisocial personalities and then describe a case that illustrates the wide range of behavioral patterns that may be involved. Although all the characteristics examined in the follow- ing sections are not usually found in any one particular case, they are typical of psychopaths as first described by Cleckley (1941, 1982). A subset of these characteristics occurs in ASPD as well.  INADEquAtE CONSCIENCE DEVElOPMENt   Psychopaths appear unable to understand and accept ethical values except on a verbal level. They may glibly claim to adhere to high moral standards that have no apparent connection with their behavior. In short, their conscience development is severely retarded or nonexistent, and they behave as though social regulations and laws do not apply to them (Frick & Marsee, 2006; Salekin, 2006). These characteristics of psychopathy are most strongly
related to the interpersonal and affective core of psychopathy (Fowles & Dindo, 2006). In spite of their stunted conscience development, their intellectual development is typically nor- mal. Nevertheless, intelligence is one trait that has different relationships with the two dimensions of psychopathy. The first, affective and interpersonal dimension is positively related to verbal intelligence (Salekin et al., 2004); the second, antiso- cial dimension is negatively related to intelligence (Frick, 1998; Hare et al., 1999).  IRRESPONSIBlE AND IMPulSIVE BEHAVIOR   Psychopaths learn to take rather than earn what they want. Prone to thrill seeking and deviant and unconventional behavior, they often break the law impulsively and without regard for the conse- quences. They seldom forgo immediate pleasure for future gains and long-range goals. These aspects of psychopathy are most closely related to the second, antisocial dimension of psychopa- thy (Patrick, 2005). Many studies have shown that antisocial personalities and some psychopaths have high rates of alcohol abuse and depen- dence and other substance-abuse/dependence disorders (e.g., Taylor & Lang, 2006; Waldman & Slutske, 2000). Alcohol abuse is related only to the antisocial or deviant dimension of the PCL-R (Patrick, 2005; Reardon al., 2002). Antisocial personali- ties also have elevated rates of suicide attempts and completed suicides, which are also associated only with the second, antiso- cial dimension of psychopathy and not with the first, affective dimension (Verona et al., 2001).  ABIlIty tO IMPRESS AND ExPlOIt OtHERS   Some psy- chopaths are superficially charming and likable, with a disarm- ing manner that easily wins new friends (Cleckley, 1941, 1982;  Cumulative Survival  0.0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 0   12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120  Months Free to First Follow-Up Violent Offense  High (30+) Medium (18–29.9) Low (0–17.9) PCL:YV Group  figure   10.2  Survival curve of months free in the community until first violent reoffense plotted by score on the by Hare Psychop- athy Checklist: Youth Version (PCL:YV) group. The survival curve illustrates the percentage of individuals in each group who have not shown a violent reoffense at 12-month intervals. Those in the High- PCL-YV group are more likely to have vio- lent reoffenses than those in the other two groups (lower probability of survival) and are more likely to have them sooner after release (indicated by the steeper slope).  Source: From Gretton et al. (2004). Psychopathy and offending from adolescence to adulthood: A 10-year follow-up.   Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72 , 636–45. Copyright © 2004 by the American Psychological Association. Reproduced with permission.
Patrick, 2006). They seem to have good insight into other people’s needs and weaknesses and are adept at exploiting them. These frequent liars usually seem sincerely sorry if caught in a lie and promise to make amends they—but they do not do so. Not surpris- ingly, then, psychopaths are seldom able to keep close friends. They seemingly cannot understand love in others or give it in return. Manipulative, exploitative, and sometimes coercive in sexual relationships, psychopaths are irresponsible and unfaithful mates. Hare, a highly influential researcher in this area, summa- rized the prototypic psychopath in the following manner:  Conceptualizing psychopaths as remorseless predators helped me to make sense of what often appears to be senseless behavior. These are individuals who, lacking in conscience and feelings for others, find it easy to use charm, manipulation, intimida- tion, and violence to control others and to satisfy their own social needs . . . without the slightest sense of guilt or regret . . . they form a significant proportion of persistent criminals, drug dealers, spouse and child abusers, swindlers and con men . . . . They are well represented in the business and corporate world, particularly during chaotic restructuring, where the rules and their enforcement are lax. . . . Many psychopaths emerge as “patriots” and “saviors” in societies experiencing social, economic, and political upheaval (e.g., Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia, and the former Soviet Union) . . . by callously exploiting ethnic, cultural, or racial tensions and grievances. (1998, pp. 128–29)  Psychopathy is well illustrated in the following classic case study published by Hare (1970).  A Psychopath in Action   Donald, 30 years old, has just completed a 3-year prison term for fraud, bigamy, false pre- tenses, and escaping lawful custody. The circumstances leading up to these offenses are interesting and consistent with his past behavior. With less than a month left to serve on an earlier 18-month term for fraud, he faked illness and escaped from the prison hospital. During the 10 months of freedom that followed, he engaged in a variety of illegal enterprises; the activity that resulted in his recapture was typical of his method of operation. By passing himself off as the “field executive” of an international philanthropic foundation, he was able to enlist the aid of several religious organizations in a fund-raising campaign. The campaign moved slowly at first, and in an attempt to speed things up, he arranged an interview with the local TV station. His performance during the interview was so impressive that funds started to pour in. However, unfortunately for Donald, the interview was also car- ried on a national news network. He was recognized and quickly arrested. During the ensuing trial it became evident that he experienced no sense of wrongdoing for his activities. . . . At the same time, he stated that most donations to charity are made by those who feel guilty about something and who therefore deserve to be bilked. While in prison he was used as a subject in some of the author’s research. On his release he applied for admission to a university and, by way of reference, told the registrar that he had been one of the author’s research colleagues! Several months later the author received a letter from him requesting a letter of recommendation on behalf of Donald’s application for a job.  Background.   Donald was the youngest of three boys born to middle-class parents. Both of his brothers led normal, produc- tive lives. His father spent a great deal of time with his business; when he was home he tended to be moody and to drink heavily when things were not going right. Donald’s mother was a gentle, timid woman who tried to please her husband and to maintain a semblance of family harmony. . . . However, . . . on some occa- sions [the father] would fly into a rage and beat the children, and on others he would administer a verbal reprimand, sometimes mild and sometimes severe. By all accounts Donald was considered a willful and difficult child. When his desire for candy or toys was frustrated he would begin with a show of affection, and if this failed he would throw a temper tantrum; the latter was seldom necessary because his angelic appearance and artful ways usually got him what he wanted. . . . Although he was obviously very intelligent, his school years were academically undistinguished. He was restless, easily bored, and frequently truant . . . when he was on his own he generally got himself or others into trouble. Although he was often suspected of being the culprit, he was adept at talking his way out of difficulty. Donald’s misbehavior as a child took many forms including lying, cheating, petty theft, and the bullying of smaller children. As he grew older he became more and more interested in sex, gambling, and alcohol. When he was 14 he made crude sexual advances toward a younger girl, and when she threatened to tell her parents he locked her in a shed. It was about 16 hours before she was found. Donald at first denied knowledge of the incident, later stating that she had seduced him and that the door must  Serial killer Ted Bundy exhibited antisocial behavior at its most extreme and dangerous. Bundy used his clean-cut image to get close to his victims—mainly young university women—whom he sexually assaulted and then savagely murdered. From all outward appearances, Bundy was a fine, upstanding citizen.
have locked itself. . . . His parents were able to prevent charges being brought against him. . . . When he was 17, Donald . . . forged his father’s name to a large check and spent about a year traveling around the world. He apparently lived well, using a combination of charm, physi- cal attractiveness, and false pretenses to finance his way. During subsequent years he held a succession of jobs, never . . . for more than a few months. Throughout this period he was charged with a variety of crimes, including theft, drunkenness in a public place, assault, and many traffic violations. In most cases he was either fined or given a light sentence.  A ladies’ Man.   His sexual experiences were frequent, casual, and callous. When he was 22, he married a 41-year-old woman whom he had met in a bar. Several other marriages followed, all bigamous. . . . The pattern was the same: He would marry some- one on impulse, let her support him for several months, and then leave. One marriage was particularly interesting. After being charged with fraud Donald was sent to a psychiatric institution for a period of observation. While there he came to the attention of a female member of the professional staff. His charm, physi- cal attractiveness, and convincing promises to reform led her to intervene on his behalf. He was given a suspended sentence, and they were married a week later. At first things went reasonably well, but when she refused to pay some of his gambling debts he forged her name to a check and left. He was soon caught and given an 18-month prison term. . . . He escaped with less than a month left to serve. It is interesting to note that Donald sees nothing particularly wrong with his behavior, nor does he express remorse or guilt for using others and causing them grief. Although his behavior is self-defeating in the long run, he considers it to be practical and possessed of good sense. Periodic punishments do nothing to decrease his egotism and confidence in his own abilities. . . . His behavior is entirely egocentric, and his needs are satisfied with- out any concern for the feelings and welfare of others. (Reprinted with permission of Robert P. Hare, University of British Columbia, rhare@interchange.ubc.ca)  The repetitive behavior pattern exhibited by Donald is com- mon among people diagnosed as psychopathic. Some of the mul- titude of etiological factors that are involved in the development of this very serious personality disorder are considered next.  Causal Factors in Psychopathy and Antisocial Personality  Contemporary research has variously stressed the causal roles of genetic factors, temperamental characteristics, deficiencies in fear and anxiety, more general emotional deficits, the early learning of antisocial behavior as a coping style, and the influence of par- ticular family and environmental patterns. Because an antisocial person’s impulsiveness, acting out, and intolerance of discipline and a psychopathic person’s callous interpersonal traits tend to appear early in life, many investigators have focused on the role of early biological and environmental factors as causative agents in antisocial and psychopathic behaviors.  GENEtIC INFluENCES   Until fairly recently, most behavior genetic research focused on genetic and environmental influences on antisocial behavior or criminality rather than on psychopathy itself. At least 100 studies have compared concordance rates be- tween monozygotic and dizygotic twins, and a number of studies used the adoption method, wherein rates of criminal behavior in the adopted-away children of criminals were compared with the rates of criminal behavior in the adopted-away children of ordi- nary (non-criminal) parents. The results of both kinds of studies show a moderate heritability for antisocial or criminal behavior (Carey & Goldman, 1997; Hare et al., 2012; Sutker & Allain, 2001) and for ASPD (Waldman & Rhee, 2006), although non- shared environmental influences play an equally important role. More recently, several strong studies have also demonstrated that psychopathy and some of its important features also show a mod- erate heritability (e.g., Blonigen et al., 2003, 2006; see Hare et al., 2012; Waldman & Rhee, 2006, for reviews). For example, a twin study of 3,687 twin pairs at age 7 found that the early signs of callous/unemotional traits in these children were highly heritable (Viding et al., 2005). However, researchers also note that strong environmental influences (to be discussed later) interact with genetic predisposi- tions (a genotype–environment interaction) to determine which individuals become criminals or antisocial personalities (Carey & Goldman, 1997; Hare et al., 2012; Moffitt, 2005). Indeed, this must be the case, given the dramatic increases in crime that have occurred in the United States and the United Kingdom since 1960, as well as the tenfold-higher murder rate in the United States than in the United Kingdom (Rutter, 1996); such find- ings cannot be accounted for by genetic factors alone but must involve psychosocial or sociocultural causal factors. One excellent study by Cadoret and colleagues (1995; see also Riggins-Caspers et al., 2003) found that adopted-away chil- dren of biological parents with ASPD were more likely to develop antisocial personalities if their adoptive parents exposed them to an adverse environment than if their adoptive parents exposed them to a more normal environment. Adverse environments were characterized by some of the following: marital conflict or divorce, legal problems, and parental psychopathology. Similar findings of a gene–environment interaction were also found in twins who were at high or low risk for conduct disorder (typically a child- hood precursor of ASPD); in this study, the environmental risk factor was physical maltreatment (Jaffee et al., 2005). The most exciting study on gene–environment interac- tions and ASPD identified a candidate gene that seems to be very involved (Caspi et al., 2002). This gene, known as the monoamine oxidase-A gene (MAO-A gene), is involved in the breakdown of neurotransmitters like norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin— all neurotransmitters affected by the stress of maltreatment that
can lead to aggressive behavior (see Figure 10.3). In this study, over a thousand children from New Zealand were followed from birth to age 26. Researchers found that individuals with low MAO-A activity were far more likely to develop ASPD if they had experienced early maltreatment than were individuals with high MAO-A activity and early maltreatment and than individuals with low levels of MAO-A activity without early maltreatment. Similar findings have been reported for conduct disorder (Foley et al., 2004) and ADHD (Kim-Cohen et al., 2006)—both common precursors of adult ASPD and psychopathy. The relationship between antisocial behavior and substance abuse is sufficiently strong that some have questioned whether there may be a common factor leading to both alcoholism and antisocial personality. Early studies of genetic factors involved in the predisposition to antisocial personality and to alcoholism were inconsistent (Carey & Goldman, 1997), but more recent research suggests that there is significant genetic involvement in their high level of comorbidity (e.g., Krueger et al., 2002; Slutske et al., 1998; Taylor & Lang, 2006). Moreover, one study found that ASPD and other externalizing disorders (like alcohol and drug dependence and conduct disorder) all share a strong common genetic vulnerability; environmental factors were more important in determining which disorder a particular person developed (Hicks et al., 2004; Krueger et al., 2007).  tHE lOW-FEAR HyPOtHESIS AND CONDItIONING  Research evidence indicates that psychopaths who are high on the egocentric, callous, and exploitative dimension have low trait anxiety and show poor conditioning of fear (Fowles & Dindo, 2006; Lykken, 1995; Patrick, 2005). In an early classic study, Lykken (1957) found that psychopaths showed deficient conditioning of skin conductance responses (reflecting activa- tion of the sympathetic nervous system) when anticipating an unpleasant or painful event and that they were slow at learning to stop responding in order to avoid punishment. As a result, psychopaths presumably fail to acquire many of the conditioned reactions essential to normal passive avoidance of punishment, to conscience development, and to socialization (Trasler, 1978; see also Fowles & Dindo, 2006; Fowles & Kochanska, 2000). Hare aptly summarized work on this issue: “It is the emotion- ally charged thought, images, and internal dialogue that give the ‘bite’ to conscience, account for its powerful control over behavior, and generate guilt and remorse for transgressions. This is something that psychopaths cannot understand. For them conscience is little more than an intellectual awareness of rules others make up—empty words” (1998, p. 112). An impressive array of studies since the early work of Lykken has confirmed that psychopaths are deficient in the conditioning of at least subjective and certain physiological components of fear (e.g., Birbaumer et al., 2005; Flor et al., 2002; Fowles, 2001; Lykken, 1995), although they do learn at a purely cognitive level that the CS predicts the US (Birbaumer et al., 2005). Because such conditioning may underlie success- ful avoidance of punishment, this may also explain why their impulsive behavior goes unchecked. According to Fowles, the deficient conditioning of fear seems to stem from psychopaths’ having a deficient behavioral inhibition system (Fowles, 1993, 2001; Fowles & Dindo, 2006; Hare et al., 1999). The behav- ioral inhibition system has been proposed by Gray (1987; Gray & McNaughton, 1996) to be the neural system underlying anxiety. It is also the neural system responsible for learning to inhibit responses to cues that signal punishment. In this pas- sive avoidance learning, one learns to avoid punishment by not making a response (e.g., by not committing robbery, one avoids punishment). Thus deficiencies in this neural system (currently identified as involving the septo-hippocampal system and the amygdala) are associated both with deficits in conditioning of anticipatory anxiety and, in turn, with deficits in learning to avoid punishment. Recent research suggests that “successful” psychopaths do not show these same deficits. This may be why they are successful at not getting caught, as discussed in The World Around Us box on the following page. Other support for the low-fear hypothesis comes from work by Patrick and colleagues on the human startle response. Both humans and animals show a larger startle response if a startle probe stimulus (such as a loud noise) is presented when the sub- ject is already in an anxious state (e.g., Patrick et al., 1993); this is known as fear-potentiated startle. Comparing psychopathic and nonpsychopathic prisoners, Patrick and colleagues found that the psychopaths did not show this effect, but the nonpsy- chopathic prisoners did. Indeed, the psychopaths showed smaller rather than larger startle responses when viewing unpleasant and  Composite index of antisocial behavior (z scores)   1 0.75 0.5 0.25 0 –0.25 –0.5 Severe Probable None  Childhood maltreatment  Low MAO-A activity, n = 163 High MAO-A activity, n = 279  figure   10.3  Means on the composite index of antisocial behavior as a function of high or low MAO-A gene activity and a childhood history of maltreatment.  Source: Reprinted with permission from Caspi et al. (2002)   Science,   297, 851–54. Copyright © 2002 AAAS.
pleasant slides than when watching neutral slides (see also Pat- rick, 1994; Sutton et al., 2002, for related results). These deficits in fear-potentiated startle responding are related only to the first, affective dimension of psychopathy (not to the second, antisocial dimension; Patrick, 2005). The second important neural system in Gray’s model is the behavioral activation system. This system activates behavior in response to cues for reward (positive reinforcement) as well as to cues for active avoidance of threatened punishment (such as in lying or running away to avoid punishment that one has been threatened with). According to Fowles’s theory, the behavioral activation system is thought to be normal or possibly overac- tive in psychopaths, which may explain why they are quite focused on obtaining reward. Moreover, if they are caught in a misdeed, they are very focused on actively avoiding threatened punishment (e.g., through deceit and lies, or running away). This hypothesis of Fowles that psychopaths have a deficient behavioral inhibition system and a normal or possibly overac- tive behavioral activation system seems to account for three important features of psychopathy: (1) psychopaths’ deficient conditioning of anxiety to signals for punishment, (2) their dif- ficulty learning to inhibit responses that may result in punish- ment (such as illegal and antisocial acts), and (3) their normal or hypernormal active avoidance of punishment (by deceit, lies, and escape behavior) when actively threatened with punishment (Fowles, 1993, p. 9; see also Hare, 1998). Newman and colleagues (e.g., Newman, 2008; Newman & Lorenz, 2003) have also conducted research suggesting that people with psychopathy have a dominant response set for reward. Their excessive focus on reward is thought to interfere with their ability to use punishment or other contextual cues or information to modulate (or modify) their responding when rewards are no longer forthcoming at the same rate that they once were. Moreover, Newman and colleagues believe that this response modulation deficit is more central to psychopathy than is a fear deficit (or even a general emotional deficit). A number of interesting studies they have conducted are consistent with their theory. However, there is still significant controversy over  the WorlD around us  “Successful” Psychopaths  M ost research on antisocial and psychopathic personali- ties has been conducted on institutionalized individu- als, leaving us quite ignorant about the large numbers who stop short of criminal activity or who never get caught. Sev- eral early studies found the personality makeup of such individu- als (as solicited from ads such as Widom’s) to be very similar to that of institutionalized individuals. However, Widom (1978) also speculates that the “everyday” noncriminal psychopaths (some- times known as “successful” psychopaths because they somehow manage to avoid being incarcerated for long periods of time) she had studied might well not show the same autonomic nervous system deficits that are typically seen in criminal psychopaths. Specifically, as noted earlier, criminal psychopaths typically show smaller skin conductance (sweaty palm) responses in anticipation of punishment than criminal nonpsychopaths, and several other studies showed that criminal psychopaths also demonstrate lower cardiovascular (heart rate) reactivity during fear imagery or anticipation of punishment (e.g., Arnett et al., 1993; Patrick et al., 1994; see Hall & Benning, 2006, for a review). Several later studies provide tentative support for Widom’s hypothesis that successful psychopaths would not show these deficits. One study, for example, showed that 15-year-old an- tisocial boys who later managed to avoid criminal convictions through age 29 exhibited increased autonomic arousal (heart rate and skin conductance) relative to 15-year-old antisocial boys who were later convicted of crimes (Raine et al., 1995; see also Brennan et al., 1997). More direct support for Widom’s hypothesis is provided by a study examining autonomic stress reactivity in successful and unsuccessful criminal psychopaths and control subjects, all living in the community and trying to find temporary employment (Ishikawa et al., 2001). Each sub- ject was told to give a short speech about his personal faults and weaknesses, during which time he was observed and videotaped. While subjects were preparing for and giving the speech, their heart rate was monitored. The results indicated that successful psychopaths (who had committed approximately the same number and type of crimes as the unsuccessful psy- chopaths, although they had never been convicted) showed greater heart rate reactivity to this stressful task than did the controls or the unsuccessful psychopaths. Thus, just as Widom had predicted, the successful psychopaths did not show the re- duced cardiovascular responsivity that the unsuccessful psycho- paths exhibited when anticipating and experiencing a stressor. This is consistent with the idea that the increased cardiac re- activity of the successful psychopaths may serve them well in processing what is going on in risky situations and in making decisions that may prevent their being caught. Additional neu- ropsychological tests revealed that the successful psychopaths also showed superior “executive functioning” (higher-order cognitive processes such as planning, abstraction, cognitive flexibility, and decision making), which also probably enhanced their ability to elude punishment. Moreover, they also tend to come from less disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds than criminal psychopaths (Hall & Benning, 2006). Clearly, more research is needed on this important group of successful, non- incarcerated psychopaths, who commit a great deal of crime but somehow manage to avoid being caught.
whether this response modulation deficit hypothesis can account for the wide array of findings in support of the low-fear (and other emotional deficits) hypothesis.  MORE GENERAl EMOtIONAl DEFICItS   Researchers have also been interested in whether there are more general emotional deficits in psychopaths than simply deficits in the conditioning of anxiety (Fowles & Dindo, 2006; Hare et al., 1999; Patrick, 2005). Psychopaths showed less significant physiological reac- tivity to distress cues (slides of people crying who are obviously quite distressed) than nonpsychopaths. This is consistent with the idea that psychopaths are low on empathy (Blair, 2006; Blair et al., 1997), in addition to being low on fear. However, they were not underresponsive to unconditioned threat cues such as slides of sharks, pointed guns, or angry faces. Patrick and col- leagues have demonstrated that this effect of smaller (rather than larger) startle responses when viewing unpleasant slides is especially pronounced with slides depicting scenes of victims who have been mutilated or assaulted but not with slides rep- resenting threats to the self (aimed weapons or looming attack- ers; Levenston et al., 2000). This specific failure to show larger startle responses with victim scenes might be related to the lack of empathy common in psychopathy (e.g., Blair et al., 1997). Blair (2006) summarizes evidence showing that such emotional deficits seem to be due, at least in part, to the dysfunction in the amygdala that is commonly seen in psychopathy. For example, individuals with psychopathy show less activity in the amygdala (relative to controls) not only during fear conditioning but also when viewing sad or frightened faces (see Marsh & Blair, 2008, for a quantitative review). Hare has hypothesized that the kinds of emotional deficits discussed so far are only a subset of more general difficulties that psychopaths have with processing and understanding the meaning of affective stimuli, including positive and negative words and sounds (e.g., Blair et al., 2006; Lorenz & Newman, 2002; Verona et al., 2004). Hare summarized work in this area as follows: “Psychopaths . . . seem to have difficulty in fully understanding and using words that for normal people refer to ordinary emotional events and feelings. . . . It is as if emotion is a second language for psychopaths, a language that requires a considerable amount of . . . cognitive effort on their part” (1998, p. 115). It has been suggested that such deficits in turn are closely linked to the deficits in moral reasoning and behavior seen in people with psychopathy because to reason about moral issues requires that an individual has concern about the rights and welfare of other people (Blair, 2007b).  EARly PARENtAl lOSS, PARENtAl REjECtION, AND INCONSIStENCy   In addition to genetic factors and emo- tional deficits, slow conscience development and high levels of both reactive and instrumental aggression are influenced by the damaging effects of parental rejection, abuse, and neglect ac- companied by inconsistent discipline (e.g., Farrington, 2006; Luntz & Widom, 1994). However, studies of gene–environment interactions reviewed earlier clearly indicate that these kinds of disturbances are not sufficient explanations for the origins of psychopathy or antisocial personality because some people are clearly more susceptible to these effects than others. Moreover, these same conditions have been implicated in a wide range of later maladaptive behaviors. In the following section, we present an integrated developmental perspective using a biopsychosocial approach with multiple interacting causal pathways.  A Developmental Perspective on Psychopathy and Antisocial Personality  It has long been known that (1) these disorders generally begin early in childhood, especially for boys, (2) that the number of antisocial behaviors exhibited in childhood is the single best pre- dictor of who will develop an adult diagnosis of ASPD, and (3) the younger they start, the higher the risk (Robins, 1978, 1991). Today, early antisocial symptoms are associated with a diagnosis of conduct disorder (see  5) and include theft, truancy, running away from home, and associating with delinquent peers. Long-term prospective studies have now shown that the family factors that are most important in predicting which children will show the most antisocial behaviors are poor parental supervision, harsh or erratic parental discipline, physical abuse or neglect, disrupted family life, and a convicted mother (Farrington, 2006). But what causes some children to be more susceptible than oth- ers to the adverse effects of such environmental influences? Prospective studies have shown that it is children with an early history of oppositional defiant disorder—characterized by a pattern of hostile and defiant behavior toward authority figures that usually begins by the age of 6 years, followed by early-onset conduct disorder around age 9—who are most likely to develop ASPD as adults (e.g., Lahey et al., 2005). For these children, the types of antisocial behaviors exhibited across the first 25 years of life change a great deal with development but are persistent in nature (Hinshaw, 1994). By contrast, children without the pathological background who develop conduct disorder in ado- lescence do not usually become lifelong antisocial personalities but instead have problems largely limited to the adolescent years (Frick & Marsee, 2006; Moffitt & Caspi, 2001; Patterson & Yoerger, 2002). The second early diagnosis that is often a precursor to adult psychopathy or ASPD is attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). ADHD is characterized by restless, inattentive, and impulsive behavior, a short attention span, and high distractibil- ity (see  5). When ADHD co-occurs with conduct dis- order (which happens in at least 30 to 50 percent of cases), this leads to a high likelihood that the person will develop a severely aggressive form of ASPD and possibly psychopathy (Abramowitz et al., 2004; Lahey et al., 2005; Patterson et al., 2000). Indeed, Lynam (2002) has referred to children with ADHD and con- duct disorder as “fledgling psychopaths,” and several ways of assessing psychopathy in youth have been developed, with the
Psychopathy Checklist—Youth Version (Forth et al., 2003) being perhaps the best validated (Salekin, 2006; Salekin et al., 2004). There is increasing evidence that genetic propensities to mild neuropsychological problems such as those leading to hyperactivity or attentional difficulties, along with a dif- ficult temperament, may be important predisposing factors for early-onset conduct disorder, which often leads to life-course- persistent adult ASPD. The behavioral problems that these pre- disposing factors create have a cascade of pervasive effects over time. For example, on the basis of extensive longitudinal pro- spective research, Moffitt, Caspi, and colleagues (2002; Moffitt, 2006) have suggested that  “Life-course-persistent” antisocial behavior originates early in life, when the difficult behavior of a high-risk young child is exacerbated by a high-risk social environment. Accord- ing to the theory, the child’s risk emerges from inherited or acquired neuropsychological variation, initially manifested as subtle cognitive deficits, difficult temperament, or hyper- activity. The environment’s risk comprises factors such as inadequate parenting, disrupted family bonds, and poverty. The environmental risk domain expands beyond the family as the child ages, to include poor relations with people such as peers and teachers, then later with partners and employers. Over the first 2 decades of development, transactions between individual and environment gradually construct a disordered personality with hallmark features of physical aggression, and antisocial behavior persisting to midlife. (Moffit et al., 2002, p. 180)  Many other psychosocial and sociocultural contextual vari- ables contribute to the probability that a child with the genetic or constitutional liabilities discussed above will develop conduct disorder and, later, ASPD. As discussed previously, these include the parents’ own antisocial behaviors, divorce and other parental transitions, poverty and crowded inner-city neighborhoods, and parental stress (e.g., Dishion & Patterson, 1997; Dodge & Pettit, 2003; Farrington, 2006; Reid et al., 2002). All of these contrib- ute to poor and ineffective parenting skills—especially ineffective disciplining, monitoring, and supervising—which are highly pre- dictive of antisocial behavior (e.g., Farrington, 2006; Granic & Patterson, 2006). Moreover, antisocial behavior involving coercive interchanges trains children in these behaviors. This in turn all too often leads to association with deviant and aggressive peers and to the opportunity for further learning of antisocial behavior (Dodge & Pettit, 2003; Farrington, 2006). A general mediational model for how all this occurs is shown in Figure 10.4. Until fairly recently it was not apparent how this integrated model applied to the development of the traits and behaviors  Antisocial lifestyle  Neighborhood/ school  Education and occupation   Stress events   Divorce/ transitions  Ineffective parenting—especially discipline and supervision  Employment  Parent psychopathology  Early arrest Chronic delinquency  Deviant peers Child antisocial behavior  figure   10.4  A model for the association of family context and antisocial behavior. Each of the contextual variables in this model has been shown to be related to antisocial behavior in boys, which in turn is related to antisocial behavior in adults. Antisocial behavior in girls is far less common and has also been found to be less stable over time, making it more difficult to predict. (Capaldi & Patterson, 1994. Interrelated influences of contextual factors on antisocial behavior. In D. C. Fowles et al. (Eds.),   Progress in Experimental Personality and Psychopa- thology Research . Springer Publishing Company.)
representing the affective–interpersonal core of psychopathy. In the past decade, Frick and colleagues have developed a way of assessing children’s callous and unemotional traits, which seem to represent early manifestations of this first dimension of psy- chopathy (e.g., Frick & Marsee, 2006; Frick & Morris, 2004; Frick et al., 2003). They have noted that there are at least two different dimensions of children’s difficult temperament that seem to lead to different developmental outcomes. Some chil- dren have great difficulty learning to regulate their emotions and show high levels of emotional reactivity, including aggressive and antisocial behaviors when responding to stressful demands and negative emotions like frustration and anger. Such children are at increased risk for developing ASPD and high scores on the anti- social dimension of psychopathy. But other children may have few problems regulating negative emotions, instead showing fearlessness and low anxiety as well as callous/unemotional traits and reduced amygdala activation while responding to fearful facial expressions (e.g., Marsh et al., 2008). These are the chil- dren most likely to show poor development of conscience, and their aggressive behaviors are more instrumental and premedi- tated rather than reactive as seen with those children who have emotional regulation difficulties. These latter children are likely to develop high scores on the first, interpersonal affective core of psychopathy, leading to the cold, remorseless psychopaths who show low fear and lack of empathy.  SOCIOCultuRAl CAuSAl FACtORS AND PSyCHOPAtHy  Cross-cultural research by Murphy (1976) on psychopathy re- veals that it occurs in a wide range of cultures including nonin- dustrialized ones as diverse as the Inuit of northwest Alaska and the Yoruba of Nigeria. The Yoruba people’s concept of a psy- chopath is “a person who always goes his own way regardless of others, who is uncooperative, full of malice, and bullheaded,” and the Inuit’s concept is of someone whose “mind knows what to do but he does not do it. . . . This is an abstract term for the breaking of the many rules when awareness of the rules is not in question” (Murphy, 1976, p. 1026). Nevertheless, the exact manifestations of the disorder are influenced by cultural factors, and the prevalence of the disorder also seems to vary with sociocultural influences that encourage or discourage its development (Cooke et al., 2005; Hare et al., 1999; Sullivan & Kosson, 2006). Regarding different cross-cultural manifestations of the disorder, one of the primary symptoms where cultural varia- tions occur is the frequency of aggressive and violent behavior. Socialization forces have an enormous impact on the expression of aggressive impulses. Thus it is not surprising that in some cultures, such as China, psychopaths may be much less likely to engage in aggressive, especially violent, behavior than they are in most Western cultures (Cooke, 1996). By contrast, cross-cultural studies have indicated that the affective-interpersonal dimension of psychopathy is the most consistent across cultures (Cooke et al., 2005). Moreover, cultures can be classified along a dimension distinguishing between individualistic and collectivist societies. Competitiveness, self-confidence, and independence from oth- ers are emphasized in relatively individualistic societies, whereas contributions and subservience to the social group, acceptance of authority, and stability of relationships are encouraged in relatively collectivist societies (Cooke, 1996; Cooke & Michie, 1999). Thus we would expect individualistic societies (such as in the United States) to be more likely to promote some of the behavioral characteristics that, carried to the extreme, result in psychopathy. These characteristics include “grandiosity, glibness and superficiality, promiscuity . . . as well as a lack of responsi- bility for others. . . . The competitiveness . . . not only produces higher rates of criminal behavior but also leads to an increased use of . . . deceptive, manipulative, and parasitic behavior” (Cooke & Michie, 1999, p. 65). Although the evidence bear- ing on this is minimal, it is interesting to note that estimates of the prevalence of ASPD are much lower in Taiwan, a relatively collectivist society, than they are in the United States (approxi- mately 0.1 to 0.2 percent versus 1.5 to 4 percent).  Children and adolescents who show persistent patterns of aggression toward people or animals, destruction of property, deceitfulness or theft, and serious violation of rules at home or in school may be at risk for de- veloping conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder.
treatments and Outcomes in Psychopathic and Antisocial Personality  Most people with psychopathic and antisocial personalities do not experience much personal distress and do not believe they need treatment. Those who run afoul of the law may participate in rehabilitation programs in penal institutions, but they are rarely changed by them. Even when more and better therapeutic facili- ties are available, effective treatment will still be a challenging task, and many clinical researchers working with these populations have concluded that these disorders are extraordinarily difficult (if not impossible) to treat, with psychopathy being even more difficult to treat than ASPD (e.g., Hare et al., 1999; Harris & Rice, 2006; Vitale & Newman, 2008). Such conclusions are not made lightly. Dozens of treatment studies have been conducted. Alarmingly, a few studies have found that treatments that work for other crimi- nal offenders can actually be harmful for psychopaths in that rates of reoffending increase rather than decrease (Harris & Rice, 2006). This may be especially likely to occur if the treatment program emphasizes training in social skills or empathy because such skills may simply make them better at charming or conning future vic- tims (Vitale & Newman, 2008). Biological treatment approaches for antisocial and psycho- pathic personalities—including electroconvulsive therapy and drugs—have not been systematically studied, partly because the few results that have been reported suggest modest changes at best. Drugs such as lithium and anticonvulsants used to treat bipolar disorder have had some success in treating the aggressive/impulsive behavior of violent aggressive criminals, but evidence on this is scant (Markovitz, 2001; Minzenberg & Siever, 2006). There have also been some tentative but promising results using antidepressants from the SSRI category, which can sometimes reduce aggressive/ impulsive behavior and increase interpersonal skills (Lösel, 1998; Minzenberg & Siever, 2006). However, none of these biological treatments has any substantial impact on the disorder as a whole. Moreover, even if effective pharmacological treatments were found, the problem of these individuals generally having little motivation to take their medications would remain (Markovitz, 2001).  COGNItIVE-BEHAVIORAl tREAtMENtS   For reasons dis- cussed earlier, punishment by itself is generally ineffective for changing antisocial behavior. Cognitive-behavioral treatments have thus often been thought to offer the greatest promise of more effective treatment (Hare et al., 2012; Harris & Rice, 2006; Lösel, 1998; Piper & Joyce, 2001). Common targets of cognitive-behavioral interventions include the following: (1) increasing self-control, self-critical thinking, and social perspec- tive taking; (2) increasing victim awareness; (3) teaching anger management; (4) changing antisocial attitudes; and (5) curing drug addiction. Such interventions require a controlled situ- ation in which the therapist can administer or withhold rein- forcement and the individual cannot leave treatment (such as an inpatient or prison setting) because when treating antisocial behavior, we are dealing with a total lifestyle rather than a few specific, maladaptive behaviors (e.g., Hare et al., 2012; Piper & Joyce, 2001). Even the best of these multifaceted, cognitive- behaviorally oriented treatment programs generally produce only modest changes, although they are somewhat more effective in treating young offenders (teenagers) than older offenders, who are often hard-core, lifelong psychopaths. Moreover, although such treatments may be useful in reducing inmates’ antisocial behavior while in a prison or other forensic setting, the results do not usu- ally generalize to the real world if the person is released (Harris & Rice, 2006). Thus some experts in the area have concluded that at the present time it may be best to think about management rather than treatment of psychopathic offenders. Or as three prominent researchers recently put it “the programs should be less concerned with developing empathy and conscience or ef- fecting changes in personality than with convincing participants that they alone are responsible for their behavior, and that there are more prosocial ways of using their strengths and abilities to satisfy their needs and wants” (Hare et al., 2012, p. 493). Fortunately, the criminal activities of many psychopathic and antisocial personalities seem to decline after the age of 40 even without treatment, possibly because of weaker biologi- cal drives, better insight into self-defeating behaviors, and the cumulative effects of social conditioning. Such individuals are often referred to as “burned-out psychopaths.” Although there is not a great deal of evidence on this issue (Douglas et al., 2006), one important study that followed a group of male psychopaths over many years found a clear and dramatic reduction in levels of criminal behavior after age 40. However, over 50 percent of these people continued to be arrested after age 40 (Hare et al., 1988). Moreover, it is only the antisocial behavioral dimension of psychopathy that seems to diminish with age; the egocentric, callous, and exploitative affective and interpersonal dimension persists (Cloninger et al., 1997; Hare et al., 1999). In view of the distress and unhappiness that psychopaths inflict on others and the social damage they cause, it seems desirable—and more economical in the long run—to put increased effort into the development of effective prevention pro- grams. Longitudinal prevention research on children at risk for conduct disorder is discussed in the Developments in Practice box.  in review  •   List the three   DSM   criteria that must be met before an individual is diagnosed with ASPD, and cite the additional personality traits that define psychopathy.  •   What are several reasons why many researchers believe psy- chopathy is a more valid construct than ASPD?  •   What biological factors contribute to these disorders?  •   What are the primary features of a developmental perspective on these disorders?
developments in pracTice  Prevention of Psychopathy and Antisocial Personality Disorder  G iven the difficulties in treating conduct disorder, ASPD, and psychopathy, there is an increasing focus on preven- tion programs oriented toward both minimizing some of the developmental and environmental risk factors described ear- lier and breaking some of the vicious cycles that at-risk children seem to get into. Intelligence is one naturally occurring protec- tive factor for some adolescents who are at risk for developing psychopathy or antisocial personality in adulthood (Hawkins et al., 1997). For example, several studies found that many ado- lescents with conduct disorder never get involved in criminal behavior because they are positively influenced by schooling and focus their energies on more socially accepted behaviors (e.g., White et al., 1989). Of course, not all at-risk adolescents have high intelligence, and those who do not may benefit from more structured prevention programs. Given the life-course developmental model for the etiology of ASPD, devising prevention strategies becomes very complex because many different stages present targets for preventive interventions (e.g., Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 2007; Dodge & Pettit, 2003). Some interventions that have been shown to help are aimed at mothers estimated to be at high risk (poor, first-time, and single) for producing children who could be at risk and include prenatal care aimed at improv- ing maternal nutrition, decreasing smoking and other substance use, and improving parenting skills (Olds et al., 1986, 1994; Reid & Eddy, 1997). For young children, Patterson, Dishion, Reid, and colleagues have developed programs that target the family environment and teach effective parental discipline and supervision (e.g., Dishion & Kavanaugh, 2002; Gardner, Shaw et al., 2007; Reid et al., 2002). At-risk children whose families receive such inter- ventions do better academically, are less likely to associate with delinquent peers, and are less likely to get involved in drug use. Such family or parent training can even be effective at reducing or preventing further antisocial behavior in children and adoles- cents already engaged in antisocial behavior, although conduct- ing the intervention with pre-elementary school children was more effective and less labor intensive (see Reid & Eddy, 1997, for a review). In general, the earlier the prevention and inter- vention efforts are started, the greater the likelihood that they may succeed. However, it is also important to realize that any single intervention by itself is unlikely to be successful because there are so many different kinds of forces that influence at-risk children throughout their development (Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 2007; Dodge & Pettit, 2003). Some significant advances have also been made in prevention programs targeting the school environment or the school and family environments concurrently. One especially promising mul- tisite, 10-year intervention study of this sort is called the FAST Track (Families and Schools Together) intervention. In the early 1990s over 400 kindergarten students who attended schools associated with high risk (generally those that serve inner-city and poor neighborhoods) and who already showed poor peer relations and high levels of disruptive behavior were recruited for this intensive program, which included parent training and school interventions. Another group of over 400 high-risk chil- dren were assigned to a control group who received treatment as usual (i.e., no new special programs). There was a focus on improving social-cognitive and cognitive skills, friendships with peers, emotional awareness, and self-control. Teachers and parents were taught how to manage disruptive behavior, and parents were informed of what their children were being taught. Early results through the third grade were quite prom- ising in terms of reducing later conduct problems (Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 2010). Parenting behav- ior and children’s social-cognitive skills also showed significant improvement. Children in FAST Track were also less likely to be nominated by peers as aggressive, and they tended to be better liked and to show better reading skills (Coie, 1996; Reid & Eddy, 1997). Later results by grade 9 were remarkable for the children in the highest risk category (top 3 percent on risk). Among these children, the intervention group had lower rates of conduct disorder (reduced by 75 percent) and ADHD (re- duced by 53 percent) relative to the control group. Importantly, children assigned to the Fast Track intervention also had experi- enced fewer arrests relative to control children by the time they reached the age of 19. Although such interventions are expen- sive (the estimated cost per child was $58,000 over 10 years), if they can prevent (or at least dramatically reduce) the extremely costly effects on society of these children if they develop full- blown adult ASPD or psychopathy, the long-term benefits will outweigh the initial costs. And indeed, estimates are that each very high-risk youth costs society $1.2 to $2 million in rehabilita- tion, incarceration, and costs to victims. Thus a $58,000 interven- tion may be enormously cost-effective in the long run (Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 2007).
10.1   What are some of the general features of personality disorders?  •   Personality disorders appear to be rather inflexible and distorted behavioral patterns and traits that result in maladaptive ways of perceiving, thinking about, and relating to other people and the environment.  •   Three general clusters of personality disorders have been described in   DSM , although researchers have increasingly questioned the validity of these clusters.  10.2   What are some of the difficulties of doing research on personality disorders?  •   Even with structured interviews, the reliability of diagnosing personality disorders typically is less than ideal. Most researchers today agree that a dimensional approach for assessing personality disorders would be preferable.  •   It is difficult to determine the causes of personality disorders as categories because most people with one personality disorder also have at least one more and because most studies to date are retrospective.  10.3   What characteristics do the Cluster A personality disor- ders have in common?  •   Cluster A includes paranoid, schizoid, and schizotypal personal- ity disorders; individuals with these disorders seem odd or eccen- tric. Little is known about the causes of paranoid and schizoid  unresolveD issues  DSM-5 : How Can We Improve the Classification of Personality Disorders?  R eading this chapter will have given you an understanding of some of the difficulties associated with the use of an exclusively categorical diagnostic system for personal- ity disorders. For instance, you may have had some difficulty in developing a clear, distinctive picture of each of the personality disorders. You may also have recognized that the characteristics and attributes of some disorders, such as schizoid personality dis- order, seemed to blend with other conditions, such as the schizo- typal or the avoidant personality disorders. It is also the case that people frequently do not fit neatly into any one specific diagnostic category. They may also qualify for a diagnosis of more than one personality disorder (e.g., Clark, 2007; Grant, Stinson et al., 2005; Widiger et al., 1991). Indeed, a common diagnosis is “personality disorder not otherwise specified” (e.g., Livesley, 2007; Krueger & Eaton, 2010; Verheul & Widiger, 2004; Verheul et al., 2007), a category reserved for people who exhibit features from several different categories but do not cleanly fit within any of them. In the past, many studies of personality disorder categories were conducted in an effort to find discrete breaks in such personality dimensions—that is, points at which normal behavior becomes clearly distinct from pathological behavior. None were found (Livesley, 2001; Widiger & Sanderson, 1995). Moreover, changes in the cut-points, or thresholds for diagnosis of a personal- ity disorder, can have drastic and unacceptable effects on the apparent prevalence rates of a particular personality disorder diagnosis (Widiger & Trull, 2007). For instance, when the   DSM-III  was revised to the   DSM-III-R , it was noted that the rate of schiz- oid personality disorder increased by 800 percent and narcissis- tic personality disorder by 350 percent (Morey, 1988). Such issues are much less problematic when a dimensional (or continuous rating) system is used because it is expected that across individuals there will be many different patterns of eleva- tion of scores on different facets of different traits. As noted ear- lier, the personality traits classified for the personality disorders are dimensional in nature. For example, everyone is suspicious at times, but the degree to which this trait exists in someone with paranoid personality disorder is extreme. A dimensional system would allow people to be rated on the degree to which they exhibit each facet and trait dimension—not on whether they do or do not have a given personality disorder. Each indi- vidual would also be rated on numerous dimensions, and highly personalized patterns of scores would thus be expected rather than problematic. There has been lively debate among psychologists and psychia- trists over the best way to design a more dimensional system (Clark, 2007; Livesley, 2011; Skodol et al., 2011). Although it has long been clear that a more dimensional system is needed, actually implementing this has proven very difficult. A major challenge has been creating a scientifically valid diagnostic system that is not overly complicated and does not render the substantial research on existing categories useless. As we noted earlier, the proposal that was offered for inclusion in   DSM-5  was not accepted. Although moving to a dimensional system makes a lot of sense for many reasons, the complexity of the model that was proposed was no doubt a major issue. All of this speaks to the difficulty of creating a valid yet utilitarian diag- nostic system that satisfies the different needs of both clinicians and researchers.  10   summary
disorders, but genetic and other biological factors are implicated in schizotypal personality disorder.  10.4   What characteristics do the Cluster B personality disorders have in common?  •   Cluster B includes histrionic, narcissistic, antisocial, and border- line personality disorders; individuals with these disorders share a tendency to be dramatic, emotional, and erratic. Little is known about the causes of histrionic and narcissistic disorders. Certain biological and psychosocial causal factors have been identified as increasing the likelihood of developing borderline personality disorder in those at risk because of high levels of impulsivity and affective instability.  10.5   What characteristics do the Cluster C personality disorders have in common?  •   Cluster C includes avoidant, dependent, and obsessive- compulsive personality disorders; individuals with these disor- ders show fearfulness or tension, as in anxiety-based disorders. Children with an inhibited temperament may be at heightened risk for avoidant personality disorder, and individuals high on neuroticism and agreeableness, with authoritarian and overpro- tective parents, may be at heightened risk for dependent person- ality disorder.  10.6   What are the clinical features of borderline personality disorder and how is this disorder treated?  •   Borderline personality disorder is characterized by emotional instability, fears of abandonment, impulsivity, self-mutilating behavior, and an unstable sense of self. People with BPD have intense and stormy personal relationships.  •   There is relatively little research on treatments for most per- sonality disorders. However, a form of behavior therapy called dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) is beneficial for people with BPD. DBT helps patients learn to manage their emotions and develop new coping skills. Other recently developed forms of therapy for BPD include transference-focused psychotherapy and mentalization-based treatment. A wide range of medications (antidepressants, antipsychotic medications, and mood stabiliz- ing medications) are also used sometimes.  10.7   What are the features of antisocial personality disorder and psychopathy?  •   A person with psychopathy shows elevated levels of two different dimensions of traits: (1) an affective-interpersonal set of traits reflecting lack of remorse or guilt, callousness/lack of empathy, glibness/superficial charm, grandiose sense of self-worth, and pathological lying, and (2) antisocial, impulsive, and socially deviant behavior; irresponsibility; and parasitic lifestyle. A person diagnosed with ASPD is primarily characterized by traits from the second dimension of psychopathy.  •   Genetic and temperamental, learning, and adverse environmental factors seem to be important in causing psychopathy and ASPD.  •   Psychopaths also show deficiencies in fear and anxiety as well as more general emotional deficits.  •   Treatment of individuals with ASPD psychopathy is difficult, partly because they rarely see any need to change and tend to blame other people for their problems.  key terms  antisocial personality disorder (ASPD)   353  avoidant personality disorder   345  borderline personality disorder (BPD)   342  dependent personality disorder   347  dialectical behavior therapy   351  histrionic personality disorder   338  narcissistic personality disorder   339  obsessive-compulsive personal- ity disorder (OCPD)   348  paranoid personality disor- der   333  personality disorder   328  psychopathy   353  schizoid personality disorder   335  schizotypal personality disorder   336
learning objectives  11.1  What is alcohol abuse and dependence?  11.2  What is drug abuse and dependence?  11.3  Are there addictive disorders other than alcohol and drugs?  Remarkable Recoveries from Life-Threatening Substance Abuse   Lyle Prouse was born in Wichita, Kansas, in 1938 of American Indian heritage. As a child he was very interested in aviation and won his first airplane ride by writing an essay for Beechcraft Aircraft Company. Prouse, who grew up in the Indian community in Wichita, had a serious, long-term substance abuse problem, as did his parents, both of whom died from alcohol abuse. Many of his friends and associates were heavy alcohol abusers. After he finished high school he joined the U.S. Marines, became a pilot, and served in the Vietnam War. He was awarded several medals for his service in Vietnam. He left the military and obtained a flying position at Northwest Airlines, where he attained the rank of captain and worked for 22 years, flying Boeing 727 passenger aircraft. In 1990, Captain Prouse and his flight crew enjoyed a night of heavy drinking while on a layover in Fargo, North Dakota. Prouse consumed a number of rum-and-Diet-Cokes, and his crew drank several pitchers of beer and apparently were very loud and belligerent. Although his crew left the bar earlier, Prouse remained longer and continued drinking. During their drinking binge the flight crew angered a customer in the pub, who later called the FAA, warning them against the problem drinking of the crew. The next morning the Northwest crew continued their flight to Minneapolis and were arrested and given substance use tests. They showed high levels of alcohol in their bloodstreams and were charged with violating a federal law, which included prison time as a result of operating a public transportation carrier under the influence of drugs or alcohol. Captain Prouse and his crewmembers served 12 months of the 16-month sentence they received. All three pilots lost their jobs and their pilot’s licenses as a result of the substance use violations. Captain Prouse felt a great deal of depression and shame at the problems that he created for himself and others following the loss of the aviation career that he loved. He also experienced a great deal of financial problems from his employment termina- tion. On several occasions he contemplated committing suicide. Captain Prouse entered inpatient substance abuse treatment not long after the incident. After completing his recovery in an inpatient substance abuse treatment center, Prouse began a long and difficult process of rehabilitation and effort to restore his life without using alcohol. He made many public speeches describing his substance abuse and later wrote a book detailing what he had gone through (Prouse, 2001). Throughout his recovery he was determined to regain his flying status. It was necessary for him to retrain and retake all of the FAA licensing examinations in order to have his qualifications restored because he was required to requalify for every one of his licenses and ratings. Captain Prouse was assisted in his recovery by a number of people who were impressed by his public disclosure of wrong- doing and his high motivation to recover from his substance abuse. After he appealed to the court to allow him the opportu- nity to obtain recertification, the court waived the legal restric- tions that had been placed upon him at the trial. A friend of his who owned a trainer aircraft allowed him to earn the necessary flying time needed to be relicensed as a pilot. The CEO of Northwest Airlines, John Dasburg, who himself had grown up in a family with alcoholic abuse problems, took personal interest in Prouse’s struggle and encouraged his return to duty. He returned to flying with Northwest Airlines. Captain Prouse’s efforts and success at rehabilitation were indeed impressive. In 2001 he was granted a presidential pardon by President Clinton. Interestingly, another one of the pilots on the Northwest “drunk pilots” flight, flight engineer Joe Balzer, who also spent 12 months in federal prison, also rehabilitated himself. He became involved with Alcoholics Anonymous and, over time, requalified for the aviation certification, eventually returning to the cockpit as a pilot for American Airlines (see his autobiograph- ical account in Balzer, 2009).  The extensive problem of substance abuse and substance de- pendence in our society has drawn both public and scientific attention. Although our present knowledge is far from complete, investigating these problems as maladaptive patterns of adjust- ment to life’s demands, with no social stigma involved, has led to clear progress in understanding and treatment. Such an approach, of course, does not mean that an individual bears no personal responsibility in the development of a problem. On the contrary, individual lifestyles and personality features are thought by many to play important roles in the development of substance-related disorders and are central themes in some types of treatment.  Substance-related disorders   can be seen all around us: in extremely high rates of alcohol abuse and dependence, and in tragic exposés of cocaine abuse among star athletes and entertain- ers.   Addictive behavior —behavior based on the pathological need for a substance—may involve the abuse of substances such  11
as nicotine, alcohol, Ecstasy, or cocaine. Addictive behavior is one of the most prevalent and difficult-to-treat mental health problems facing our society today. The most commonly used problem substances are those that affect mental functioning in the central nervous system (CNS)—  psychoactive substances : alcohol, nicotine, barbiturates, tran- quilizers, amphetamines, heroin, Ecstasy, and marijuana. Some of these substances, such as alcohol and nicotine, can be purchased legally by adults; others, such as barbiturates or pain medications like OxyContin (or marijuana in some states), can be used legally under medical supervision; still others, such as heroin, Ecstasy, and methamphetamine, are illegal. The material described in this chapter was designed to pro- vide both a historic and contemporary view of important research and theoretical strategies in understanding addictive disorders thus we will, in places, refer to the substance abuse versus substance dependence distinction. The following distinctions are important to understanding and diagnosing substance-related disorders:  •   Substance abuse   generally involves an excessive use of a sub- stance resulting in (1) potentially hazardous behavior such as driving while intoxicated or (2) continued use despite a per- sistent social, psychological, occupational, or health problem.  •   Substance dependence   includes more severe forms of sub- stance-use disorders and usually involves a marked physiolog- ical need for increasing amounts of a substance to achieve the desired effects. Dependence in these disorders means that an individual will show a tolerance for a drug and/or experience withdrawal symptoms when the drug is unavailable.  •   Tolerance —the need for increased amounts of a substance to achieve the desired effects—results from biochemical changes in the body that affect the rate of metabolism and elimination of the substance from the body.  •   Withdrawal   refers to physical symptoms such as sweating, tremors, and tension that accompany abstinence from the drug.  Alcohol Related Disorders  The terms   alcoholic   and   alcoholism   have been subject to some controversy and have been used differently by various groups in the past. The World Health Organization no longer recommends the term   alcoholism   but prefers the term   alcohol dependence syndrome —“a state, psychic and usually also physical, result- ing from taking alcohol, characterized by behavioral and other responses that always include a compulsion to take alcohol on a continuous or periodic basis in order to experience its psychic effects, and sometimes to avoid the discomfort of its absence; tolerance may or may not be present” (1992, p. 4). However, because the terms   alcoholic   and   alcoholism   are still widely used in practice, in scientific journals, and in government agencies and publications, we will sometimes use them in this book. People of many ancient cultures, including the Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, and Israelites, made extensive and often exces- sive use of alcohol. Beer was first made in Egypt around 3000 b.c. The oldest surviving wine-making formulas were recorded by Marcus Cato in Italy almost a century and a half before the birth of Christ. About a.d. 800, the process of distillation was developed by an Arabian alchemist, thus making possible an increase in both the range and the potency of alcoholic bever- ages. Problems with excessive use of alcohol were observed almost as early as its use began. Cambyses, King of Persia in the sixth century b.c., has the dubious distinction of being one of the early alcohol abusers on record.  The Prevalence, Comorbidity, and Demo graphics of Alcohol Abuse and Dependence  Alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence are major problems in the United States and are among the most destructive of the psy- chiatric disorders because of the impact excessive alcohol use can have upon users’ lives and those of their families and friends. It is  The picture shows an 1891 Stale Beer Dive on Mulberry Street Bend, New York, with several drunk people from the neighborhood and includes beers being served by a young girl (Campbell et al., 1892).
estimated that 50 percent of adults who are 18 or older are current regular drinkers and only 21 percent are lifetime abstainers (Pleis et al., 2009). In 2008, 23.3 percent of Americans aged 12 or older reported binge drinking, and 6.7 percent were found to be heavy drinkers (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Adminis- tration, 2010). An estimated 12.4 percent of persons 12 or older drove under the influence of alcohol at least once over the past year. An estimated 22.2 million persons (8.9 percent of the popu- lation aged 12 or older) were classified with substance dependence or abuse in the past year based on   DSM   diagnostic criteria. In this sample, 3.1 million people were classified with dependence on or abuse of both alcohol and illicit drugs, 3.9 million were dependent on or abused illicit drugs but not alcohol, and 15.2 million were dependent on or abused alcohol but not illicit drugs (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2009). The potentially detrimental effects of excessive alcohol use—for an individual, his or her loved ones, and society—are legion. Heavy drinking is associated with vulnerability to injury (Cherpitel 1997), marital discord (Hornish & Leonard, 2007), and becoming involved in intimate partner violence (Eckhardt, 2007). The life span of the average person with alcohol depen- dence is about 12 years shorter than that of the average person without this disorder. Alcohol significantly lowers performance on cognitive tasks such as problem solving—and the more com- plex the task, the more the impairment (Pickworth et al., 1997). Organic impairment, including brain shrinkage, occurs in a high proportion of people with alcohol dependence (Gazdzinski et al., 2005), especially among binge drinkers—people who abuse alco- hol following periods of sobriety (Hunt, 1993). One study reported that of the 1.3 million emergency room visits associated with drug misuse or abuse in 2007, 7 percent involved alcohol abuse in patients under age 21 (USDHHS, 2010). Cherpitel and colleagues (2006) explored the association of alcohol use and emergency room (ER) services among injured patients in several countries. Of 9,743 injured patients surveyed in 37 ERs in 14 countries, drinking within 6 hours before injury was associated with prior visits to the ER during the last 12 months. People who were heavy drinkers or were alcohol dependent were significantly more likely to report multiple prior emergency room visits. Alcohol abuse is associated with over 40 percent of the deaths suffered in automobile accidents each year (Chou et al., 2006) and with about 40 to 50 percent of all murders (Bennett & Lehman, 1996), 40 percent of all assaults, and over 50 percent of all rapes (Abbey et al., 2001). About one of every three arrests in the United States is related to alcohol abuse, and over 43 percent of violent encounters with the police involve alcohol (McClelland & Teplin, 2001). In research on substance abuse and violent crime, Dawkins (1997) found that alcohol is more frequently associated with both violent and nonviolent crime than drugs such as marijuana and that people with violence- related injuries are more likely to have a positive Breathalyzer test (Cherpitel, 1997). Of the 1 million violent crimes that were suspected to be alcohol related in 2002, 30 percent of them were determined to involve alcohol use on the part of the offender. Two-thirds of cases in which victims suffered violence from an intimate (a current or former spouse) were alcohol related (U.S. Department of Justice, 2006).  A.   A problematic pattern of alcohol use leading to clinically sig- nificant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12-month period:  1.   Alcohol is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was intended.  2.   There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control alcohol use.  3.   A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain alcohol, use alcohol, or recover from its effects.  4.   Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use alcohol.  5.   Recurrent alcohol use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work, school, or home.  6.   Continued alcohol use despite having persistent or recur- rent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacer- bated by the effects of alcohol.  7.   Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or reduced because of alcohol use.  8.   Recurrent alcohol use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.  9.   Alcohol use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by alcohol.  10.   Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:  a.   A need for markedly increased amounts of alcohol to achieve intoxication or desired effect.  b.   A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of alcohol.  11.   Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:  a.   The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for alcohol (refer to Criteria A and B of the criteria set for alcohol withdrawal, pp. 499–500).  b.   Alcohol (or a closely related substance, such as a ben- zodiazepine) is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor- ders,   Fifth Edition, (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Alcohol Use Disorder   DSM-5
Alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence in the United States cut across all age, educational, occupational, and socioeconomic boundaries. Alcohol abuse is found in priests, politicians, sur- geons, law enforcement officers, and teenagers; the image of the alcohol-abusing person as an unkempt resident of skid row is clearly inaccurate. Alcohol abuse is considered a serious problem in industry, in the professions, and in the military as well. Recent research has shown that alcohol abuse has a strong presence in the workplace, with 15 percent of employees showing problem behaviors; many (1.68 percent, or 2.1 million people) actually drinking on the job; and 1.83 percent, or 2.3 million workers, drinking before they go to work (Frone, 2006). Some myths about alcoholism are noted in Table 11.1 on p. 372. In the past, most problem drinkers—people experiencing life problems as a result of alcohol abuse—were men; for example, men become problem drinkers at about five times the frequency of women (Helzer et al., 1990). Recent epidemiological research has suggested that the traditional gap between men and women has narrowed when it comes to the development of substance abuse disorders (Greenfield et al., 2010). There do not seem to be impor- tant differences in rates of alcohol abuse between black and white Americans, although Native Americans tend to have higher rates of alcohol abuse, and Asian Americans tend to have lower usage. It appears that problem drinking may develop during any life period from early childhood through old age. About 10 percent of men over age 65 are found to be heavy drinkers (Breslow et al., 2003). Surveys of alcoholism rates across different cultural groups around the world have found varying rates of the disorder across diverse cultural samples (Caetano et al., 1998; Hibell et al., 2000). Over 37 percent of alcohol abusers suffer from at least one coexisting mental disorder (Lapham et al., 2001). Not surpris- ingly, given that alcohol is a depressant, depression ranks high among the mental disorders often comorbid with alcoholism. There is a high comorbidity of substance abuse disorders and eating disorders (Harrop & Marlatt, 2009). It is also no surprise that many alcoholics commit suicide (McCloud et al., 2004). In addition to the serious problems that excessive drinkers create for themselves, they also pose serious difficulties for others (Gortner et al., 1997). Alcohol abuse also co-occurs with high frequency with personality disorder. Grant and colleagues (2004) report that among individuals with a current alcohol-use disorder, 28.6 percent have at least one personality disorder. The diagnosis of substance use disorder in   DSM-5   is based upon a pathological pattern of behaviors that are related to the use of a particular substance, for example, alcohol. The DSM Criteria for Alcohol Use Disorder are reproduced on page 370 as an illustration. Two additional diagnostic criteria for Alcohol Related Disorders can be found in the   DSM-5   manual: Alcohol Intoxication (p. 497) and Alcohol Withdrawal (p. 499).  The Clinical Picture of Alcohol Related Disorders  A great deal of progress has been made in understanding the physiological effects of alcohol on the brain. The first is a ten- dency toward decreased sexual inhibition but, simultaneously, lowered sexual performance. An appreciable number of alcohol abusers also experience blackouts—lapses of memory. At first these occur at high blood alcohol levels, and a drinker may carry on a rational conversation or engage in other relatively complex activities but have no trace of recall the next day. For heavy drinkers, even moderate drinking can elicit memory lapses. Another phenomenon associated with alcoholic intoxication (intoxication is defined as a state of being affected by one or more psychoactive drugs) is the hangover, which many drinkers experi- ence at one time or another. As yet, no one has come up with a satisfactory explanation of or remedy for the symptoms of head- ache, nausea, and fatigue that are characteristic of the hangover.  AlCohol’S EffECTS on ThE BRAin   Alcohol has complex and seemingly contradictory effects on the brain. At lower levels, alcohol stimulates certain brain cells and activates the brain’s  Alcohol is associated with over 40 percent of deaths and serious injuries suffered in automobile accidents in the United States each year (see Chou et al., 2006).
“pleasure areas,” which release opium-like endogenous opioids that are stored in the body (Braun, 1996). At higher levels, alcohol depresses brain functioning, inhibiting one of the brain’s excitatory neurotransmitters, glutamate, which in turn slows down activity in parts of the brain (Koob et al., 2002). Inhibition of glutamate in the brain impairs the organism’s ability to learn and affects the higher brain centers, impairing judgment and other rational processes and lowering self-control. As behavioral restraints decline, a drinker may indulge in the satisfaction of im- pulses ordinarily held in check. Some degree of motor uncoordi- nation soon becomes apparent, and the drinker’s discrimination and perception of cold, pain, and other discomforts are dulled. Typically the drinker experiences a sense of warmth, expansive- ness, and well-being. In such a mood, unpleasant realities are screened out and the drinker’s feelings of self-esteem and ad- equacy rise. Casual acquaintances become the best and most un- derstanding of friends, and the drinker enters a generally pleasant world of unreality in which worries are temporarily left behind. In most U.S. states, when the alcohol content of the bloodstream reaches 0.08 percent, the individual is considered intoxicated, at least with respect to driving a vehicle. Muscu- lar coordination, speech, and vision are impaired and thought processes are confused. Even before this level of intoxication is reached, however, judgment becomes impaired to such an extent that the person misjudges his or her condition. For example, drinkers tend to express confidence in their ability to drive safely long after such actions are in fact quite unsafe. When the blood alcohol level reaches approximately 0.5 percent (the level differs somewhat among individuals), the entire neural balance is upset and the individual passes out. Unconsciousness apparently acts as a safety device because concentrations above 0.55 percent are usually lethal. In general, it is the amount of alcohol actually concentrated in the bodily fluids, not the amount consumed, that determines intoxication. The effects of alcohol vary for different drinkers, depending on their physical condition, the amount of food in their  table   11.1  Some Common Misconceptions About Alcohol and Alcohol Abuse fiction   fact  Alcohol is a stimulant.   Alcohol is actually both a nervous system stimulant and a depressant. You can always detect alcohol on the breath of a person who has been drinking. It is not always possible to detect the presence of alcohol. Some individuals suc- cessfully cover up their alcohol use for years. One ounce of 86-proof liquor contains more alcohol than two 12-ounce cans of beer. Two 12-ounce cans of beer contain more than an ounce of alcohol. Alcohol can help a person sleep more soundly.   Alcohol may interfere with sound sleep. Impaired judgment does not occur before there are obvi- ous signs of intoxication. Impaired judgment can occur long before motor signs of intoxication are apparent. An individual will get more intoxicated by mixing liquors than by taking comparable amounts of one kind—e.g., bourbon, Scotch, or vodka. It is the actual amount of alcohol in the bloodstream rather than the mix that deter- mines intoxication. Drinking several cups of coffee can counteract the effects of alcohol and enable a drinker to “sober up.” Drinking coffee does not affect the level of intoxication. Exercise or a cold shower helps speed up the metabolism of alcohol. Exercise and cold showers are futile attempts to increase alcohol metabolism. People with “strong wills” need not be concerned about becoming substance abusers. Alcohol is seductive and can lower the resistance of even the “strongest will.” Alcohol cannot produce a true addiction in the same sense that heroin can. Alcohol has strong addictive properties. One cannot become a substance abuser by drinking just beer. One can consume a considerable amount of alcohol by drinking beer. It is, of course, the amount of alcohol that determines whether one becomes a substance abuser. Alcohol is far less dangerous than marijuana.   There are considerably more individuals in treatment programs for alcohol prob- lems than for marijuana abuse. In a heavy drinker, damage to the liver shows up long be- fore brain damage appears. Heavy alcohol use can be manifested in organic brain damage before liver damage is detected. The physiological withdrawal reaction from heroin is con- sidered more dangerous than is withdrawal from alcohol. The physiological symptoms accompanying withdrawal from heroin are no more frightening or traumatic to an individual than alcohol withdrawal. Actually, alcohol withdrawal is potentially more lethal than opiate withdrawal. Everybody drinks.   Actually, 28 percent of men and 50 percent of women in the United States are abstainers.
stomach, and the duration of their drinking. In addition, alcohol users may gradually build up a tolerance for the drug so that ever- increasing amounts may be needed to produce the desired effects. Women metabolize alcohol less effectively than men and thus become intoxicated on lesser amounts (Gordis et al., 1995).  DEvEloPMEnT of AlCohol DEPEnDEnCE   Excessive drink- ing can be viewed as progressing insidiously from early- to middle- to late-stage alcohol-related disorder, although some abusers do not follow this pattern. Many investigators have maintained that alcohol is a dangerous systemic poison even in small amounts, but others believe that in moderate amounts it is not harmful to most people. For pregnant women, however, even moderate amounts are believed to be dangerous; in fact, no safe level has been estab- lished, as is discussed in Developments in Research box below. The photos on page 374 show the differences between the brain of a normal teenager and those born with fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), a condition that is caused by excessive alcohol consump- tion during pregnancy and results in birth defects such as mental retardation.  ThE PhySiCAl EffECTS of ChRoniC AlCohol USE   For individuals who drink to excess, the clinical picture is highly unfavorable (Turner et al., 2006). Alcohol that is taken in must be assimilated by the body, except for about the 5 to 10 percent that is eliminated through breath, urine, and perspiration. The work of alcohol metabolism is done by the liver, but when large amounts of alcohol are ingested, the liver may be seriously over- worked and eventually suffer irreversible damage (Lucey et al., 2009). In fact, from 15 to 30 percent of heavy drinkers develop cirrhosis of the liver, a disorder that involves extensive stiffening of the blood vessels. About 40 to 90 percent of the 26,000 an- nual cirrhosis deaths every year are alcohol related (Parrish et al., 1991). Some countries, for example Britain and Scotland, have  developments in ReseaRch  Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: How Much Drinking Is Too Much?  R esearch indicates that heavy drinking by expectant moth- ers can affect the health of unborn babies, particularly binge drinking and heavy drinking during the early days of pregnancy (Burd & Christensen, 2009; Calhoun & Warren, 2007)—a condition known as   fetal alcohol syndrome . Newborn infants whose mothers drank heavily during pregnancy have been found to have frequent physical and behavioral abnormali- ties (Alison, 1994), including aggressiveness and destructiveness (Gardner, 2000), and may experience symptoms of withdrawal (Thomas & Riley, 1998). For example, such infants have shown growth deficiencies, facial and limb irregularities, damage to the central nervous system, and impairment in cognitive functioning (Kodituwakku et al., 2001). Neuroimaging research has shown that there is an overall reduction of brain size and prominent brain shape abnormalities, with narrowing in the parietal region along with reduced brain growth in portions of the frontal lobe (Spadoni et al., 2007). Moreover, children with FAS often show significant working memory deficits and altered activations pat- terns in some brain regions (Astley et al., 2009). As noted in   The Third Report on Alcohol and Health   (HEW, 1978), alcohol abuse in pregnant women is the third-leading cause of birth defects—the first two being Down syndrome and spina bifida (the incomplete formation and fusion of the spinal canal). Although data on FAS are often difficult to obtain, the prevalence has been estimated at between 0.5 and 2 cases per 1,000 births (May & Gossage, 2001). How much drinking endangers a newborn’s health? The HEW report warns against drinking more than 1 ounce of alcohol per day (one 12-ounce can of beer or one 5-ounce glass of wine, for example). The actual amount of alcohol that can safely be ingested during pregnancy is not known, but existing evidence for FAS is strongest when applied to binge drinkers or heavy al- cohol users rather than to light or moderate users (Kolata, 1981). Nonetheless the surgeon general and many medical experts have concurred that pregnant women should abstain from using alcohol as the “safest course” until the safest amount of alcohol consumption can be determined (Raskin, 1993).  The effects of FAS can be both dramatic and long-lasting. This young child who had been diagnosed with FAS shows some of the perma- nent physical abnormalities characteristic of the syndrome.
shown an increase in cirrhosis-related deaths in the last two de- cades because of the increased use of alcohol in their populations (Leon & McCambridge, 2006). Alcohol is also a high-calorie drug. A pint of whiskey— enough to make about eight to ten ordinary cocktails—provides about 1,200 calories, which is approximately half the ordinary caloric requirement for a day (Flier et al., 1995). Thus con- sumption of alcohol reduces a drinker’s appetite for other food. Because alcohol has no nutritional value, the excessive drinker can suffer from malnutrition (Derr & Gutmann, 1994). Further- more, heavy drinking impairs the body’s ability to utilize nutri- ents, so the nutritional deficiency cannot be made up by popping vitamins. Many alcohol abusers also experience increased gastro- intestinal symptoms such as stomach pains (Fields et al., 1994).  PSyChoSoCiAl EffECTS of AlCohol ABUSE AnD DEPEnDEnCE   In addition to various physical problems, a heavy drinker usually suffers from chronic fatigue, oversensitivity, and depression. Initially, alcohol may seem to provide a useful crutch for dealing with the stresses of life, especially during periods of acute stress, by helping screen out intolerable realities and enhance the drinker’s feelings of adequacy and worth. The excessive use of alcohol eventually becomes counterproductive, however, and can result in impaired reasoning, poor judgment, and gradual person- ality deterioration. Behavior typically becomes coarse and inap- propriate, and the drinker assumes increasingly less responsibility, loses pride in personal appearance, neglects spouse and family, and becomes generally touchy, irritable, and unwilling to discuss the problem.   Watch   the   Video   Chris: Alcoholism  on   MyPsychLab  As judgment becomes impaired, an exces- sive drinker may be unable to hold a job and generally becomes unqualified to cope with new demands that arise (Frone, 2003). General personality disorganization and deterioration may be reflected in loss of employment and marital breakup. By this time, the drinker’s general health is likely to have deteriorated, and brain and liver damage may have occurred. For example, there is some evidence that an alcoholic’s brain is accumulating diffuse organic damage even when no extreme organic symptoms are present (Sullivan, Deshmukh, et al., 2000), and even mild to moderate drinking can adversely affect memory and problem solving (Gordis, 2001). Other researchers have found extensive alcohol consumption to be asso- ciated with an increased amount of organic damage in later life (Lyvers, 2000); however, recent research using fMRI has shown that this damage is partially reversible if the person abstains from alcohol use (Wobrock et al., 2009).  PSyChoSES ASSoCiATED wiTh SEvERE AlCohol ABUSE   Excessive use of alcohol can result in severe mental health problems. Several acute psychotic reactions fit the diagnostic clas- sification of substance-induced disorders. These reactions may develop in people who have been drinking excessively over long periods of time or who have a reduced tolerance for alcohol for other reasons—for example, because of brain lesions from exces- sive long-term use. Such acute reactions usually last only a short time and generally consist of confusion, excitement, and delirium. There is some evidence that delirium may be associated with lower levels of thiamine in alcoholics (Holzbeck, 1996). These disorders are often called “alcoholic psychoses” because they are marked by a temporary loss of contact with reality. Among those who drink excessively for a long time, a reaction called   alcohol withdrawal delirium   (formerly known as   delirium  tremens ) may occur (Palmstierno, 2001). This reaction usually happens following a prolonged drinking spree when the person enters a state of withdrawal. Slight noises or suddenly moving objects may cause considerable excitement and agitation. The full- blown symptoms include (1) disorientation for time and place, in which, for example, a person may mistake the hospital for a church or jail, no longer recognize friends, or identify hospital attendants as old acquaintances; (2) vivid hallucinations, particu- larly of small, fast-moving animals like snakes, rats, and roaches; (3) acute fear, in which these animals may change in form, size, or color in terrifying ways; (4) extreme suggestibility, in which a per- son can be made to see almost any animal if its presence is merely suggested; (5) marked tremors of the hands, tongue, and lips; and (6) other symptoms including perspiration, fever, a rapid and weak heartbeat, a coated tongue, and foul breath.  MRIs of three teenagers: (left) normal control, 13-year-old female; (center) FAS, 13-year-old male with focal thinning of the corpus callosum; (right) FAS, 14-year-old male with complete agenesis (nondevelopment) of the corpus callosum.
The delirium typically lasts from 3 to 6 days and is generally followed by a deep sleep. When a person awakens, few symp- toms—except for possibly slight remorse—remain, but frequently the individual is badly scared and may not resume drinking for several weeks or months. Usually, however, drinking is eventually resumed, followed by a return to the hospital with a new attack. The death rate from withdrawal delirium as a result of convul- sions, heart failure, and other complications once approximated 10 percent (Tavel, 1962). With drugs such as chlordiazepoxide, however, the current death rate during withdrawal delirium and acute alcoholic withdrawal has been markedly reduced. A second alcohol-related psychosis is persisting alcohol disorder or alcohol amnestic disorder (formerly known as Korsakoff’s syndrome). This condition was first described by the Russian psychiatrist Korsakoff in 1887 and is one of the most severe alcohol-related disorders (d’Ydewalle & Van Damme, 2007). The outstanding symptom is a memory defect (particu- larly with regard to recent events), which is sometimes accom- panied by falsification of events (confabulation). Persons with this disorder may not recognize pictures, faces, rooms, and other objects that they have just seen, although they may feel that these people or objects are familiar. Such people increasingly tend to fill in their memory gaps with reminiscences and fanciful tales that lead to unconnected and distorted associations. These indi- viduals may appear to be delirious, delusional, and disoriented for time and place, but ordinarily their confusion and disordered actions are closely related to their attempts to fill in memory gaps. The memory disturbance itself seems related to an inability to form new associations in a manner that renders them readily retrievable. Such a reaction usually occurs in long-time alcohol abusers after many years of excessive drinking. These patients have also been observed to show other cognitive impairments such as planning deficits (Brokate et al., 2003), intellectual decline, emotional deficits (Snitz et al., 2002), judgment deficits (Brand et al., 2003), and cortical lesions (Estruch et al., 1998). The symptoms of alcohol amnestic disorder are now thought to be due to vitamin B (thiamine) deficiency and other dietary inadequacies. Although it had been believed that a diet rich in vitamins and minerals generally restores such a patient to more normal physical and mental health, some research evidence suggests otherwise. Lishman (1990) reports that alcohol amnestic disorder did not respond well to thiamine replacement. Some memory functioning appears to be restored with prolonged abstinence. However, some personality deterioration usually remains in the form of memory impairment, blunted intellectual capacity, and lowered moral and ethical standards.  Alcohol Amnestic Disorder   Averill B. was brought into the detoxification unit of a local county hospital by the police after an incident at a crowded city park. He was arrested because of his assaultive behavior toward others (he was walking through the crowded groups of sunbathers muttering to himself, kicking at people). At admission to the hospital, Averill was disoriented (did not know where he was), incoherent, and confused. When asked his name, he paused a moment, scratched his head, and said, “George Washington.” When asked about what he was doing at the park, he indicated that he was “marching in a parade in his honor.”  Biological Causal factors in the Abuse of and Dependence on Alcohol  In trying to identify the causes of problem drinking, some researchers have stressed the role of genetic and biochemical fac- tors (see Hartz, & Bierut, 2010); others have pointed to psycho- social factors, viewing problem drinking as a maladaptive pattern of adjustment to the stress of life; and still others have empha- sized sociocultural factors such as the availability of alcohol and social approval of excessive drinking. As we will see, some com- bination of all of these factors seems to influence risk for devel- oping alcohol abuse or alcohol dependency. As with most other forms of maladaptive behavior, there may be several types of alco- hol abuse and dependency, each with somewhat different patterns of biological, psychosocial, and sociocultural causal factors. How do substances such as alcohol, cocaine, and opium (discussed later in the chapter) come to have such powerful effects—an overpowering hold that occurs in some people after only a few uses of the drug? Although the exact mechanisms are not fully agreed on by experts in the field, two important factors are apparently involved. The first is the ability of most, if not all, addictive substances to activate areas of the brain that produce intrinsic pleasure and sometimes immediate, powerful reward. The second factor involves the person’s biological makeup, or constitution, including his or her genetic inheritance and the environmental influences (learning factors) that enter into the need to seek mind-altering substances to an increasing degree as use continues. The development of an alcohol addiction is a complex process involving many elements—constitutional vulnerability and environmental encouragement, as well as the unique biochemical properties of certain psychoactive sub- stances. Let’s examine each of these elements in more detail.  ThE nEURoBiology of ADDiCTion   Let’s first examine the role that substances like alcohol play in the process of addiction. Psychoactive drugs differ in their biochemical properties as well as in how rapidly they enter the brain. There are several routes of administration—oral, nasal, and intravenous. Alcohol is usually drunk, the slowest route, whereas cocaine is often self-adminis- tered by injection or taken nasally. Central to the neurochemical process underlying addiction is the role the drug plays in activating the “pleasure pathway.” The   mesocorticolimbic dopamine path- way (MCLP)   is the center of psychoactive drug activation in the brain. The MCLP is made up of neuronal cells in the middle por- tion of the brain known as the ventral tegmental area (see Figure 11.1) and connects to other brain centers such as the nucleus ac- cumbens and then to the prefrontal cortex. This neuronal system
is involved in such functions as control of emotions, memory, and gratification. Alcohol produces euphoria by stimulating this area in the brain. Research has shown that direct electrical stimulation of the MCLP produces great pleasure and has strong reinforcing properties (Littrell, 2001). Other psychoactive drugs also oper- ate to change the brain’s normal functioning and to activate the pleasure pathway. Drug ingestion or behaviors that lead to activa- tion of the brain reward system are reinforced, so further use is promoted. The exposure of the brain to an addictive drug alters its neurochemical structure and results in a number of behavioral ef- fects. With continued use of the drug, neuroadaptation to or toler- ance and dependence on the substance develop.  gEnETiC vUlnERABiliTy   The possibility of a genetic predis- position to developing alcohol-abuse problems has been widely researched. Many experts today agree that heredity probably plays an important role in a person’s developing sensitivity to the addictive power of drugs like alcohol (Plomin & DeFries, 2003; Volk et al., 2007). Several lines of research point to the impor- tance of genetic factors in substance-related disorders. A review of 39 studies of the families of 6,251 alcoholics and of 4,083 nonalcoholics who had been followed over 40 years reported that almost one-third of alcoholics had at least one par- ent with an alcohol problem (Cotton, 1979). Likewise, a study of children of alcoholics by Cloninger and colleagues (1986) reported strong evidence for the inheritance of alcoholism. They found that for males, having one alcoholic parent increased the rate of alcoholism from 12.4 percent to 29.5 percent and having two alcoholic parents increased the rate to 41.2 percent. For females with no alcoholic parents, the rate was 5.0 percent; for those with one alcoholic parent, the rate was 9.5 percent; and for those with two alcoholic parents, it was 25.0 percent. Alcohol abuse problems clearly tend to run in families (Hartz & Beirut, 2010; Hasin & Katz, 2010). Research has shown that some people, such as the sons of alcoholics, have a high risk for developing problems with alcohol because of an inherent motivation to drink or sensitivity to the drug (Conrod et al., 1998). Research on the children of alcoholics who were adopted by other (nonalcoholic) families has also provided use- ful information. Studies have been conducted of alcoholics’ children who were placed for adoption early in life and so did not come under the environmental influences of their biological parents. For example, Goodwin and colleagues (1973) found that children of alcoholic parents who had been adopted by nonalcoholic foster parents were nearly twice as likely to have alcohol problems by their late 20s as a control group of adopted children whose biological parents were not alcoholics. In another study, Goodwin and colleagues (1974) compared alcoholic par- ents’ sons who were adopted in infancy by nonalcoholic parents and sons raised by their alcoholic parents. Both adopted and nonadopted sons later evidenced high rates of alcoholism— 25 percent and 17 percent, respectively. These investigators con- cluded that being born to an alcoholic parent, rather than being raised by one, increases the risk of a son’s becoming an alcoholic. Another approach to understanding the precursors to alcohol-related disorders is to study prealcoholic personalities— individuals who are at high risk for substance abuse but who are not yet affected by alcohol. The heritability of personality characteristics has been widely explored (Bouchard & Loehlin, 2001). An alcohol-risk personality has been described as an individual (usually an alcoholic’s child) who has an inherited predisposition toward alcohol abuse and who is impulsive, prefers taking high risks, and is emotionally unstable. Research has shown that prealcoholic men (those who are genetically predisposed to developing drug or alcohol problems but who have not yet acquired the problem) show different physiological patterns than nonalcoholic men in several respects. Prealcoholic men tend to experience a greater lessening of feel- ings of stress with alcohol ingestion than do nonalcoholic men (Finn et al., 1997). Prealcoholic men also show different alpha wave patterns on EEGs (Stewart et al., 1990) and have been found to have larger conditioned physiological responses to alcohol cues than individuals who were considered at a low risk for alcoholism, according to Earleywine and Finn (1990). These results suggest that prealcoholic men may be more prone to developing tolerance for alcohol than low-risk men. Some research suggests that certain ethnic groups, particu- larly Asians and Native Americans, have abnormal physiological reactions to alcohol—a phenomenon referred to as “alcohol flush reaction.” Fenna and colleagues (1971) and Wolff (1972) found that Asian and Eskimo subjects showed a hypersensitive reaction  Prefrontal cortex Nucleus accumbens Ventral tegmental area  figure   11.1  The Mesocorticolimbic Pathway.   The mesocorticolimbic pathway (MCLP), running from the ventral tegmental area to the nucleus accum- bens to the prefrontal cortex, is central to the release of the neurotransmit- ter dopamine and in mediating the rewarding properties of drugs.  Source: Office of Technology Assessment, 1993.  Watch   the   Video   In the Real World: Neurotransmitters   on  MyPsychLab
including flushing of the skin, a drop in blood pressure, heart palpi- tations, and nausea following the ingestion of alcohol (see also Gill et al., 1999). This physiological reaction is found in roughly half of all Asians (Chen & Yeh, 1997) and results from a mutant enzyme that fails to break down alcohol molecules in the liver during the metabolic process (Takeshita et al., 1993). Although cultural factors may also play a role, the relatively lower rates of alcoholism among Asian groups might be related to the extreme discomfort associated with the alcohol flush reaction (Higuci et al., 1994).  gEnETiCS—ThE wholE SToRy?   As with the other disorders described in this book, genetics alone is not the whole story, and the exact role it plays in the development of alcohol-related dis- orders remains unclear. This issue continues to be debated, and some experts are not convinced of the primary role of genetics in substance-abuse disorders. The genetic mechanism or model for the generally agreed-upon observation that alcoholism is famil- ial is insufficient to explain the behavior fully. That is, genetic transmission in the case of alcohol-related disorders does not follow the hereditary pattern found in strictly genetic disorders. Some investigators have employed the evidence that genetics ap- pears to play a stronger role in men than in women (Merikangas & Swendsen, 1997) to question the relative power of genetics as an explanatory factor in substance abuse. Searles (1991) points to the ambiguous evidence for the genetics of alcohol-related disorders and cautions against interpreting genetics as a causal factor in its development. Negative results have been found in both twin and adoptive studies and in studies designed to fol- low up the behavior of high-risk individuals. The great majority of children who have parents with alcohol-related problems do not themselves develop substance-abuse disorders—whether or not they are raised by their biological parents. The children of substance abusers who make successful life adjustments have not been sufficiently studied. In one study of high-risk children of substance abusers, a group of young men 19 to 20 years of age who were presumably at high risk for developing substance- abuse problems were carefully studied for symptoms of psycho- pathology. Schulsinger and colleagues (1986) found that they did not differ in psychopathology or in alcohol-abuse behavior from a control sample similar to the general population. In an- other study of high-risk individuals, Alterman, Searles, and Hall (1989) failed to find differences in drinking behavior or alcohol- related symptoms between a group of high-risk subjects (those who had alcoholic fathers) and a group of non-high-risk subjects. Although much evidence implicates genetic factors in the etiology of alcoholism, we do not know what precise role they play. At present, it appears that the genetic interpretation of alcoholism remains an attractive hypothesis; however, additional research is needed for us to hold this view with confidence. It is not likely that genetics alone will account for the full range of alcohol and drug problems. Social circumstances are still con- sidered powerful forces in providing both the availability and the motivation to use alcohol and other drugs. McGue (1998) notes that the mechanisms of genetic influence should be viewed as compatible, rather than competitive, with psychological and social determinants of this disorder.  gEnETiC inflUEnCES AnD lEARning   When we talk about familial or constitutional differences, we are not strictly limiting our explanation to genetic inheritance. Rather, learning factors appear to play an important part in the development of constitu- tional or predetermined tendencies to behave in particular ways. Having a genetic predisposition or biological vulnerability to substance abuse, of course, is not a sufficient cause of the disorder. The person must be exposed to the substance to a sufficient degree for the addictive behavior to appear. In the case of alcohol, almost everyone in America is exposed to the drug to some extent—in most cases through peer pressure, parental example, and advertis- ing (Andrews & Hops, 2010). The development of alcohol-related problems involves living in an environment that promotes initial as well as continuing use of the substance. People become condi- tioned to stimuli and tend to respond in particular ways as a result of learning. Learning appears to play an important part in the development of substance abuse and antisocial personality disor- ders. There clearly are numerous reinforcements for using alcohol in our social environments and everyday lives. However, research has also shown that psychoactive drugs such as alcohol contain in- trinsic rewarding properties—apart from the social context or the drug’s operation to diminish worry or frustration. As we saw ear- lier, the drug stimulates pleasure centers in the brain and develops a reward system of its own.  Psychosocial Causal factors in Alcohol Abuse and Dependence  Not only do alcohol abusers become physiologically dependent on alcohol, they develop a powerful psychological dependence as well—they become socially dependent on the drug to help them enjoy social situations.  fAilURES in PAREnTAl gUiDAnCE   Stable family relation- ships and parental guidance are extremely important molding influences for children (Hasin & Katz, 2010), and this stability is often lacking in families of substance abusers. Children who have parents who are extensive alcohol or drug abusers are vulnerable to developing substance-abuse and related problems (Erblich et al., 2001). The experiences and lessons we learn from impor- tant figures in our early years have a significant impact on us as adults. Children who are exposed to negative role models and family dysfunction early in their lives or experience other nega- tive circumstances because the adults around them provide lim- ited guidance often falter on the difficult steps they must take in life (Fischer et al., 2005). These formative experiences can have a direct influence on whether a young person becomes involved in maladaptive behavior such as alcohol or drug abuse. In one sophisticated program of research aimed at evaluating the possibility that negative socialization factors influence alcohol
use, Chassin and colleagues (1993; Trim & Chassin, 2004) rep- licated findings that alcohol abuse in parents is associated with substance use in adolescents. They then evaluated several possible mediating factors that can affect whether adolescents start using alcohol. They found that parenting skills or parental behavior was associated with substance use in adolescents. Specifically, alcohol-abusing parents are less likely to keep track of what their children are doing, and this lack of monitoring often leads to the adolescents’ affiliation with drug-using peers. In addition, Chassin and colleagues (1993) found that stress and negative affect (more prevalent in families with an alcoholic parent) are associated with alcohol use in adolescents. They reported that “parental alcohol- ism was associated with increases in negative uncontrollable life events which, in turn, were linked to negative affect, to associa- tions with drug-using peers, and to substance use” (p. 16). In a follow-up study, Chassin and colleagues (1996) reported that the direct effect of fathers’ alcohol abuse is strong, even after control- ling for stress and negative affect. Extremely stressful childhood experiences such as physical abuse (Douglas et al., 2010; Kaufman et al., 2007) or child sexual abuse might also make a person vul- nerable to later problems. Women who have a history of child sexual abuse are at risk for developing a wide range of psychologi- cal problems including substance abuse (Kendler et al., 2000).  PSyChologiCAl vUlnERABiliTy   Is there an “alcoholic personality”—a type of character organization that predisposes a person to use alcohol rather than adopt some other defensive pattern of coping with stress? Research has suggested that per- sonality factors related to having a family history of alcoholism are associated with the development of alcohol-use disorders (Larkins & Sher, 2006). Research has shown that children of alcoholics progressed more quickly from initial alcohol use to the onset of disorder than did matched adolescents in the control sample (Hussong et al., 2008). Do some individuals self-medicate or reduce their discom- fort by excessive use of alcohol? In efforts to answer this question, investigators have found that many potential alcohol abusers tend to be emotionally immature, expect a great deal of the world, require an inordinate amount of praise and appreciation, react to failure with marked feelings of hurt and inferiority, have low frustration tolerance, and feel inadequate and unsure of their abilities to fulfill expected male or female roles. Persons at high risk for developing alcohol-related problems have been found to be significantly more impulsive and aggressive than those at low risk for abusing alcohol (Morey et al., 1984). In recent years, substantial research has focused on the link between alcohol-related disorders and such other disorders as antisocial personality, depression, and schizophrenia to determine whether some individuals are more vulnerable to substance-abuse disorders. About half of the persons with schizophrenia have either alcohol or drug abuse or dependence as well (Kosten, 1997). By far, most of the research on comorbidity has related antisocial per- sonality and addictive disorders, where about 75 to 80 percent of the studies have shown a strong association (Alterman, 1988), and conduct disorder (Slutske et al., 1998). Interestingly, antisocial personality disorder, alcohol, and aggression are strongly associated (Moeller & Dougherty, 2001), and in a survey of eight alcohol- treatment programs, Morganstern and colleagues (1997) found that 57.9 percent of those in treatment had a personality disorder, with 22.7 percent meeting criteria for antisocial personality dis- order. One study reports that substance abusers with antisocial personality disorder had lower expectations of remaining abstinent from alcohol use (Di Sclafani et al., 2007). Considerable research has suggested that there is a relation- ship between depressive disorders and alcohol abuse, and there may be gender differences in the association between these disor- ders (Kranzler et al., 1997). One group of researchers (Moscato et al., 1997) found the degree of association between depression and alcohol-abuse problems stronger among women. For whatever reason they co-occur, the presence of other mental disorders in alcohol- or drug-abusing patients is a very important consideration when it comes to treatment, as will be discussed later in this chapter.  STRESS, TEnSion REDUCTion, AnD REinfoRCEMEnT  Research studies on patients undergoing substance-abusing treatment have shown high levels of trauma in their prior histories—about 25 to 50 percent of PTSD patients also have substance-abuse disorders (Schafer & Najavits, 2007). In one study, Deters and colleagues (2006) found that 98 percent of the American Indian adolescents in their substance-abuse study reported having a history of trauma such as threat of personal injury, witnessing of injury, or sexual abuse. One recent controlled-treatment study of disaster workers who experienced PTSD following the World Trade Center trauma (Difede et al., 2007) found that excessive alcohol use was associated with dropout from treatment. Wilk and colleagues (2010) found that high expo- sure to threatening situations and atrocities (i.e., among Iraq war veterans) was associated with a positive screen for alcohol abuse.  Parent substance use is associated with early adolescent substance use, and negative parental models can have longer-range negative conse- quences once children leave home.
A number of investigators have pointed out that the typical alcohol abuser is discontented with his or her life and is unable or unwilling to tolerate tension and stress (for example, Rutledge & Sher, 2001). Hussong and colleagues (2001) reported a high degree of association between alcohol consumption and negative affectivity such as anxiety and somatic complaints. In other words, alcoholics drink to relax. In this view, anyone who finds alcohol tension-reducing is in danger of abusing alcohol, even without an especially stressful life situation. However, the tension-reduction causal model is difficult to accept as a sole explanatory hypothesis. If this process were a main cause, we would expect substance-abuse disorder to be far more common than it is because alcohol tends to reduce tension for most people who use it. In addition, this model does not explain why some excessive drinkers are able to maintain control over their drinking and continue to function in society whereas others are not.  ExPECTATionS of SoCiAl SUCCESS   Some research has ex- plored the idea that cognitive expectation may play an important role both in the initiation of drinking and in the maintenance of drinking behavior once the person has begun to use alcohol (see, for example, Marlatt et al., 1998). Many people, especially young adolescents, expect that alcohol use will lower tension and anxiety and increase sexual desire and pleasure in life (Seto & Barbaree, 1995). According to the reciprocal-influence model, adolescents begin drinking as a result of expectations that using alcohol will increase their popularity and acceptance by their peers. This view gives professionals an important and potentially powerful means of deterring drinking among young people or at least delaying its onset. From this perspective, alcohol use in teen- agers can be countered by providing young people with more effec- tive social tools and with ways of altering these expectancies before drinking begins. Smith and colleagues (1995) have suggested that prevention efforts should be targeted at children before they begin to drink so that the positive feedback cycle of reciprocal reinforce- ment between expectancy and drinking will never be established (see the discussion on prevention of alcohol use in  7). Time and experience do have   moderating   influences on these alcohol expectancies, although heavy drinking in early college years can result in risky behavior and low academic motivation (Hoeppner, et al., 2012). In a longitudinal study of college drinking, Sher and colleagues (1996) found that there was a significant decrease in outcome expectancy over time. That is, older students showed less expectation of the benefits of alco- hol than beginning students (see The World Around Us).  MARiTAl AnD oThER inTiMATE RElATionShiPS   Adults with less intimate and supportive relationships tend to show greater drinking following sadness or hostility than those with close peers and with more positive relationships (Hussong et al., 2001). Excessive drinking often begins during crisis periods in marital or other intimate personal relationships, particularly crises that lead to hurt and self-devaluation. The marital rela- tionship may actually serve to maintain the pattern of exces- sive drinking. (See the case study below.) Marital partners may behave toward each other in ways that promote or enable a spouse’s excessive drinking. For example, a husband who lives with a wife who abuses alcohol is often unaware of the fact that, gradually and inevitably, many of the decisions he makes every day are based on the expectation that his wife will be drinking. These expectations, in turn, may make the drinking behavior more likely. Eventually an entire marriage may center on the drinking of a substance-abusing spouse. In some instances, the husband or wife may also begin to drink excessively. Thus one important concern in many treatment programs today involves identifying the personality or lifestyle factors in a relationship that tend to foster the drinking in the alcohol-abusing person. Of course, such relationships are not restricted to marital part- ners but may also occur in those involved in love affairs or close friendships.  The Drunken Wife and Mother   Evelyn C., a 36-year- old homemaker and mother of two school-age children (from a previous marriage), began to drink to excess especially following intense disagreements with her husband, John, a manager of a retail business. For several months, she had been drinking during the day when her children were at school and on two occasions was inebriated when they came home. On one recent occasion, Evelyn failed to pick up her older daughter after an after-school event. Her daughter called John’s cell phone (he was out of town on a business trip), and he had an assistant pick her up. When they arrived home, Evelyn (apparently unaware of the problem she had caused) created a scene and was verbally abusive toward the assistant. Her out-of-control drinking increased when her husband of 3 years began staying out all night. These emotion- ally charged encounters resulted in John’s physically abusing her one morning when he came back home after a night away. John moved out of the house and filed for divorce.  Excessive use of alcohol is one of the most frequent causes of divorce in the United States (Perreira & Sloan, 2001) and is often a hidden factor in the two most common causes—financial and sexual problems. The deterioration in interpersonal relationships  research close-Up  Moderating  A moderating variable is a variable that influences the asso- ciation between two other variables. For example, depression is common after bereavement. However, men who have lost a spouse tend to be more likely to be depressed than women who have lost a spouse. In this case, gender is a key moderat- ing variable for the bereavement–depression relationship.
the WoRlD around us  Binge Drinking in College  T wo alcohol-related student deaths shocked the Colorado college community in the fall of 2004. Lynn B., an enter- ing freshman at the University of Colorado, drank so much whiskey and wine during a fraternity initiation that he be- came unconscious and died as a result of alcohol poisoning. This tragic incident occurred just 2 weeks after a 19-year-old sopho- more at Colorado State University, Samantha S., died of alcohol poisoning after a party at which she had consumed an estimated 40 drinks (Sink, 2004). How extensive is college binge drinking? In spite of the fact that alcohol use is illegal for most undergraduates, binge drinking on campus is widespread (Rabow & Duncan-Schill, 1995) and increased substantially between 1998 and 2005 (Mitka, 2009). Sher and Rutledge (2007) reported that college students who drank in high school are likely to continue drinking during their first year in college. According to a survey by Wechsler and colleagues (1994), 44 percent of college students in the United States are binge drinkers, and Goodwin (1992) reports that 98 percent of fraternity and sorority members drink some amount every week. Some research has suggested, however, that the pattern of drinking can vary widely, with binge drink- ing being more of an occasional rather than a regular event (Del Boca et al., 2004). Wechsler and colleagues (1994) conducted a nationwide survey of 140 college campuses in 40 states and obtained survey information pertaining to the drinking behavior and health consequences of drinking on 17,592 students (with approximately a 69 percent response rate). Students completed a 20-page survey of their drinking practices, including such information as recency of last drink, how many times they had five drinks or more in a row, and how many times they had four drinks in a row. They were also asked to provide information as to whether they experienced any of the following consequences after drinking: had a hangover, missed a class, got behind in schoolwork, did something they later regretted, forgot where they were or what they did, argued with friends, engaged in unplanned sexual activities, failed to use protection when having sex, damaged property, got into trouble with the campus police, got hurt, or required medical treatment for an alcohol overdose. The colleges surveyed in the study varied widely in the extent of binge drinking among the student body. As one might expect— some colleges earn reputations as being “party schools”—some institutions had a large number of students (70 percent) heavily involved in alcohol and binge drinking, but the problem oc- curred to some degree across most college campuses. Recent research has suggested that heavier drinking students may self- select into certain study abroad programs with specific inten- tions to use alcohol (Pedersen et al. 2010). What are the reasons for the widespread problem of binge drinking in college? Many factors can be cited, such as students’ expressing independence from parental influence (Turrisi et al., 2000); peer group and situational influences (Read et al., 2003); developing and asserting gender roles, particularly for men adopting a “macho” role (Capraro, 2000); and holding beliefs that alcohol can help make positive transformations, such as “having a few drinks to celebrate special occasions” (Turrisi, 1999). One recent study suggested that a family history of alco- hol abuse was associated with problematic drinking among col- lege students (LaBrie, et al. 2010). The consequences of college binge drinking can be far-reaching and often involve disinhibited behavior (Carlson et al., 2010). In their survey, Wechsler and colleagues (1994) reported a strong association between the frequency of binge drinking and alcohol-related health and life problems. In fact, binge drinkers were nearly 10 times more likely than those who did not indulge in binge drinking to engage in unplanned sexual activity, not to use protection when having sex, to get into trouble with campus police, to damage property, and to get hurt after drinking. Men and women tended to report similar problems, except that men engaged in more property damage than women. Over 16 per- cent of the men and 9 percent of the women reported having gotten into trouble with the campus police. About 47 percent of the frequent binge drinkers, compared with 14 percent of the non–binge drinkers, indicated that they had experienced five or more of the problems surveyed. In a more recent follow-up sur- vey of college drinking in 1997, Wechsler and colleagues (1998) reported strikingly similar results. One recent study suggests that extensive drinking in college, even among the heaviest drinkers from sororities and frater- nities, might be determined to a great extent by situational events, factors that change with graduation. In a follow-up study of drinking behavior a year after graduation, Sher, Bartholow, and Nanda (2001) reported that being a member of a fraternity or sorority did not predict postcollege drinking. Interestingly, a long-term follow-up of over 11 years has shown that the heavy drinking during college did not translate to heavy drinking during later years (Bartholow et al., 2003). These investigators found that heavy drinking that is associated with Greek society involvement does not generally lead to sustained heavy drinking in later life. Some institutions provide a psychological intervention in an ef- fort to reduce the extent of drinking among college students. One recent study reported that a procedure referred to as Brief Motivational Intervention, or BMI, produced greater self-regula- tion among a sample of binging college students by providing skills for them to moderate their drinking behavior (Carey et al., 2007). This procedure was more effective among students who also showed, in their pretreatment assessment, a readiness to change.
of the alcohol abuser or dependent, of course, further augments the stress and disorganization in her or his life. The breakdown of marital relationships can be a highly stressful situation for many people. The stress of divorce and the often erratic adjustment period that follows can lead to increased substance abuse. Family relationship problems have also been found to be central to the development of alcoholism (Dooley & Prause, 2007). In a classic longitudinal study of possible etiologic factors in alcohol abuse, Vaillant and colleagues (1982) described six family relationship factors that were significantly associated with the development of alcoholism in the individuals they studied. The most important family variables that were considered to pre- dispose an individual to substance-use problems were the pres- ence of an alcoholic father, acute marital conflict, lax maternal supervision and inconsistent discipline, many moves during the family’s early years, lack of “attachment” to the father, and lack of family cohesiveness.  Sociocultural Causal factors  Alcohol use is a pervasive component in the social life in Western civilization. Social events often revolve around alcohol use, and alcohol use before and during meals is commonplace. Alcohol is often seen as a “social lubricant” or tension reducer that enhances social events. Thus investigators have pointed to the role of sociocultural as well as biological and psychological factors in the high rate of alcohol abuse and dependence among Americans. The effect of cultural attitudes toward drinking is well illus- trated by Muslims and Mormons, whose religious values prohibit the use of alcohol, and by orthodox Jews, who have tradition- ally limited its use largely to religious rituals. The incidence of alcoholism among these groups is minimal. In comparison, the incidence of alcoholism is high among Europeans. For example, one survey showed the highest alcohol-use rates among young people to be in Denmark and Malta, where one in five students reported having drunk alcohol 10 times within the past 30 days (ESPAD, 2000). Interestingly, Europe and six countries that have been influenced by European culture—Argentina, Canada, Chile, Japan, the United States, and New Zealand—make up less than 20 percent of the world’s population and yet consume 80 percent of the alcohol (Barry, 1982). Alcohol abuse contin- ues to be a problem in Europe by, for example, contributing to accidents (Lehto, 1995), crime (Rittson, 1995), liver disease (Medical Council on Alcoholism, 1997), and the extent to which young people are developing substance-use problems (Anderson & Lehto, 1995). The French appear to have the highest rate of alcoholism in the world, involving approximately 15 percent of the population. France has both the highest per capita alcohol consumption and one of the highest death rates from cirrhosis of the liver (Noble, 1979). In addition, France shows the highest prevalence rates: In a broad survey of hospital patients, 18 percent (25 percent for men and 7 percent for women) were reported to have alcohol-use disorders even though only 6 percent of admissions were for alcohol problems (Reynaud et al., 1997). In Sweden, another country with high rates of alcoholism, 13.2 percent of men’s hospital admissions, and 1.1 percent of women’s, are attributed to alcohol (Andreasson & Brandt, 1997). Thus it appears that religious sanctions and social customs can influence whether alcohol is one of the coping methods commonly used in a given group or society. The behavior that is manifested under the influence of alcohol also seems to be influenced by cultural factors. Lindman and Lang (1994), in a study of alcohol-related behavior in eight countries, found that most people expressed the view that aggressive behavior frequently follows their drinking “many” drinks. However, the expectation that alcohol leads to aggression is related to cultural traditions and early exposure to violent or aggressive behavior. In sum, we can identify many reasons why people drink— as well as many conditions that can predispose them to do so and reinforce their drinking behavior—but the exact combina- tion of factors that results in a person’s becoming an alcoholic is still unknown.  Treatment of Alcohol-Related Disorders  Alcohol abuse and dependence are difficult to treat because many alcohol abusers refuse to admit that they have a problem before they “hit bottom,” and many who do go into treatment leave before therapy is completed. DiClemente (1993) refers to the addictions as “diseases of denial.” However, in a review of several large alcohol-treatment studies, Miller, Walters, and Bennett (2001) reported that two-thirds of studies show large and significant decreases in drinking and related problems. In this section, we will examine both biological and psychosocial treatment strategies. Some treatment approaches appear to reduce drinking-related problems more effectively than others (Miller & Wilbourne, 2002; Zweben, 2001). In general, a mul- tidisciplinary approach to the treatment of drinking problems appears to be most effective because the problems are often com- plex, requiring flexibility and individualization of treatment pro- cedures (Margolis & Zweben, 1998). Also, a substance abuser’s needs change as treatment progresses. Treatment objectives usu- ally include detoxification, physical rehabilitation, control over alcohol-abuse behavior, and the individual’s realizing that he or she can cope with the problems of living and lead a much more rewarding life without alcohol. Traditional treatment programs usually have as their goal abstinence from alcohol (Ambrogne, 2002). However, some programs attempt to promote controlled drinking as a treatment goal for problem drinkers. For example, one procedure referred to as Brief Motivational Intervention attempts to modify clients’ behavior through providing information and advice about the consequences of the substance use in an effort to challenge the users about their use—but leaves the responsibility to the indi- vidual (Carey et al., 2007; Miller & Rollnik, 2002; Peterson et al., 2006). No matter what the treatment method, relapse is common, and many in the field see relapse as a factor that must be addressed in the treatment and recovery process.
USE of MEDiCATionS in TREATing AlCohol ABUSE AnD DEPEnDEnCy   Biological approaches include a variety of treatment measures such as medications to reduce cravings, to ease the detoxification process, and to treat co-occurring health (National Institutes of Health, 2001) and mental health prob- lems that may underlie the drinking behavior.  Medications to Block the Desire to Drink   Disulfiram (Antabuse), a drug that causes violent vomiting when fol- lowed by ingestion of alcohol, may be administered to prevent an immediate return to drinking (Grossman & Ruiz, 2004). However, such deterrent therapy is seldom advocated as the sole approach because pharmacological methods alone have not proved effective in treating many severe alcohol-abuse prob- lems (Gorlick, 1993). For example, because the drug is usually self-administered, an alcohol-dependent person may simply discontinue the use of Antabuse when he or she is released from a hospital or clinic and begins to drink again. In fact, the primary value of drugs of this type seems to be their ability to interrupt the alcohol-abuse cycle for a period of time during which therapy may be undertaken. Uncomfortable side effects may accompany the use of Antabuse; for example, alcohol-based aftershave lotion can be absorbed through the skin, resulting in illness. Moreover, the cost of Antabuse treatment, which requires careful medical maintenance, is higher than that for many other, more effective treatments. Another type of medication that has been used in a prom- ising line of research (Kranzler et al., 2004) is naltrexone, an opiate antagonist that helps reduce the craving for alcohol by blocking the pleasure-producing effects of alcohol (Gueorguieva et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2010). O’Malley and colleagues (1996) have shown that naltrexone reduced the alcohol intake and low- ered the incentive to drink for alcohol abusers compared with a control sample given a placebo. Some research has suggested that naltrexone is particularly effective with individuals who have a high level of craving (Monterosso et al., 2001) and show effects of binge drinking (Johnson, 2010). Other research, however, has failed to find naltrexone effective at reducing craving (Krystal et al., 2001), so confidence in its use for this purpose must await further research.  Medications to Reduce the Side Effects of Acute withdrawal   In cases of acute intoxication, the initial focus is on detoxification (the elimination of alcoholic substances from an individual’s body), on treatment of the withdrawal symptoms described earlier, and on a medical regimen for physical reha- bilitation. One of the primary goals in treatment of withdrawal symptoms is to reduce the physical symptoms characteristic of withdrawal such as insomnia, headache, gastrointestinal distress, and tremulousness. Central to the medical treatment approaches are the prevention of heart arrhythmias, seizures, delirium, and death. These steps can usually best be handled in a hospital or clinic, where drugs such as Valium have largely revolutionized the treatment of withdrawal symptoms. Such drugs overcome motor excitement, nausea, and vomiting; prevent withdrawal delirium and convulsions; and help alleviate the tension and anxiety associated with withdrawal. Pharmacological treatments with long-lasting benzodiazepines, such as diazepam, to reduce the severity of withdrawal symptoms have been shown to be effective (Malcolm, 2003). Concern is growing, however, that the use of tranquilizers— drugs that depress the CNS, resulting in calmness, relaxation, reduction of anxiety, and sleeping—does not promote long-term recovery and may simply transfer the addiction to another sub- stance. Accordingly, some detoxification clinics are exploring alternative approaches including a gradual weaning from alcohol instead of a sudden cutoff. Maintenance doses of mild tranquil- izers are sometimes given to patients withdrawing from alcohol to reduce anxiety and help them sleep. Such use of medications may be less effective than no treatment at all, however. Usually patients must learn to abstain from tranquilizers as well as from alcohol because they tend to misuse both. Further, under the influence of medications, patients may even return to alcohol use.  PSyChologiCAl TREATMEnT APPRoAChES   Once the patient has her or his drinking under control, detoxification is optimally followed by psychological treatment, including fam- ily counseling and the use of community resources related to employment and other aspects of a person’s social readjustment. Although individual psychotherapy is sometimes effective, the focus of psychosocial measures in the treatment of alcohol-related problems often involves group therapy, environmental interven- tion, behavior therapy, and the approach used by Alcoholics Anonymous and family groups such as Al-Anon and Alateen.  group Therapy   Group therapy has been shown to be effective for many clinical problems (Galanter et al., 2005), especially substance-related disorders (Velasquez et al., 2001). In the confrontational give-and-take of group therapy, alcohol abusers are often forced (perhaps for the first time) to face their problems and their tendencies to deny or minimize them. These group situations can be extremely difficult for those who have been engrossed in denial of their own responsibilities, but such treatment also helps them see new possibilities for coping with circumstances that have led to their difficulties. Often this paves the way for them to learn more effective ways of coping and other positive steps toward dealing with their drinking problem. In some instances, the spouses of alcohol abusers and even their children may be invited to join in group therapy meet- ings. In other situations, family treatment is itself the central focus of therapeutic efforts. In that case, the alcohol abuser is seen as a member of a disturbed family in which all members have a responsibility for cooperating in treatment. Because fam- ily members are frequently the people most victimized by the alcohol abuser’s addiction, they often tend to be judgmental and
punitive, and the person in treatment, who has already passed harsh judgment on himself or herself, may tolerate this further source of devaluation poorly. In other instances, family mem- bers may unwittingly encourage an alcohol abuser to remain addicted—for example, a man with a need to dominate his wife may find that a continually drunken and remorseful spouse best meets his needs.  Environmental intervention   As with other serious mal- adaptive behaviors, a total treatment program for alcohol abuse or dependency usually requires measures to alleviate a patient’s aversive life situation. Environmental support has been shown to be an important ingredient of an alcohol abuser’s recovery. People often become estranged from family and friends because of their drinking and either lose or jeopardize their jobs. As a result, they are often lonely and live in impoverished neighbor- hoods. Typically, the reaction of those around them is not as understanding or as supportive as it would be if the alcohol abuser had a physical illness of comparable magnitude. Simply helping people with alcohol-abuse problems learn more effective coping techniques may not be enough if their social environment remains hostile and threatening. For those who have been hospi- talized, halfway houses—designed to assist them in their return to family and community—are often important adjuncts to their total treatment program.  Behavioral and Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy   An interesting and often effective form of treatment for alcohol- related disorders is behavioral therapy, of which several types exist. One is aversive conditioning therapy, which involves the presentation of a wide range of noxious stimuli with alcohol con- sumption in order to suppress drinking behavior. For example, the ingestion of alcohol might be paired with an electric shock or a drug that produces nausea. A variety of pharmacological and other deterrent measures can be used in behavioral therapy after detoxification. One approach involves an intramuscular injection of emetine hydrochloride, an emetic. Before experienc- ing the nausea that results from the injection, a patient is given alcohol, so that the sight, smell, and taste of the beverage become associated with severe retching and vomiting. That is, a condi- tioned aversion to the taste and smell of alcohol develops. With repetition, this classical conditioning procedure acts as a strong deterrent to further drinking—probably in part because it adds an immediate and unpleasant physiological consequence to the more general socially aversive consequences of excessive drinking. One of the most effective contemporary procedures for treat- ing alcohol abusers has been the cognitive-behavioral approach recommended by Alan Marlatt (1985) and Witkiewitz and Marlatt (2004). This approach combines cognitive-behavioral strategies of intervention with social-learning theory and modeling of behavior. The approach, often referred to as a “skills training procedure,” is usually aimed at younger problem drinkers who are considered to be at risk for developing more severe drinking problems because of an alcohol-abuse history in their family or their current heavy consumption. This approach relies on such techniques as imparting specific knowledge about alcohol, devel- oping coping skills in situations associated with increased risk of alcohol use, modifying cognitions and expectancies, acquir- ing stress-management skills, and providing training in life skills (Connors & Walitzer, 2001). Cognitive-behavioral treatments have been shown to be effective; for example, O’Farrell and col- leagues (2004) report that partner violence was significantly reduced following cognitive-behavioral treatment. Self-control training techniques, such as the Brief Motiva- tional Intervention noted earlier, in which the goal of therapy is to get alcoholics to reduce alcohol intake without necessarily abstaining altogether, have a great deal of appeal for some drink- ers. For example, one recent approach to improve drinking out- comes by altering the drinker’s social networks was found to be successful (Litt et al., 2007) and motivational interviewing with adolescents was found to be promising (Macgowan & Engle, 2010). There is now even a computer-based self-control training program available that has been shown to reduce problem drink- ing in a controlled study (Fals-Stewart & Lam, 2010; Neighbors et al., 2004). It is difficult, of course, for individuals who are extremely dependent on the effects of alcohol to abstain totally from drinking. Thus many alcoholics fail to complete traditional treatment programs.  ConTRollED DRinking vERSUS ABSTinEnCE   Other psychological techniques have also received attention in recent years, partly because they are based on the hypothesis that some problem drinkers need not give up drinking altogether but rather can learn to drink moderately (Miller, Walters, & Bennett, 2001; Sobell & Sobell, 1995). Several approaches to learning controlled drinking have been attempted (McMurran & Hollin, 1993), and research has suggested that some alcoholics can learn to control their alcohol intake (Senft et al., 1997). Miller and colleagues (1986) evaluated the results of four long-term follow- up studies of controlled-drinking treatment programs. Although they found a clear trend of increased numbers of abstainers and relapsed cases at long-term follow-up, they also found that a con- sistent percentage (15 percent) of subjects across the four studies controlled their drinking. The researchers concluded that con- trolled drinking was more likely to be successful in persons with less severe alcohol problems. The finding that some individuals are able to maintain some control over their drinking after treat- ment (without remaining totally abstinent) was also reported in a classic study by Polich et al. (1981). These researchers found that 18 percent of the alcoholics they studied had reportedly been able to drink socially without problems during the 6-month follow-up of treatment. Many people in the field have rejected the idea that alcohol abusers can learn to control their drinking, and some recent research has found that controlled drinking is not effective (Bottlender et al., 2007). And some groups, such as Alcoholics
Anonymous, are adamant in their opposition to programs aimed at controlled drinking for alcohol-dependent individuals.  AlCoholiCS AnonyMoUS   A practical approach to alcohol- ism that has reportedly met with considerable success is that of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). This organization was started in 1935 by two men, Dr. Bob and Bill W., in Akron, Ohio. Bill W. recovered from alcoholism through a “fundamental spiritual change” and immediately sought out Dr. Bob, who, with Bill’s assistance, also achieved recovery. They in turn began to help other alcoholics. Since that time, AA has grown to over 52,000 groups in the United States, with an annual growth rate of about 6 to 7 percent (Alcoholics Anonymous, 2007). In addition, there are nearly 5,000 AA groups in Canada and over 45,000 groups in many other countries. Alcoholics Anonymous operates primarily as a self-help counseling program in which both person-to-person and group relationships are emphasized. AA accepts both teenagers and adults with drinking problems, has no dues or fees, does not keep records or case histories, does not participate in political causes, and is not affiliated with any religious sect, although spiritual development is a key aspect of its treatment approach. To ensure anonymity, only first names are used. Meetings are devoted partly to social activities, but they consist mainly of dis- cussions of the participants’ problems with alcohol, often with testimonials from those who have stopped drinking. Such mem- bers usually contrast their lives before they broke their alcohol dependence with the lives they now live without alcohol. We should point out here that the term alcoholic is used by AA and its affiliates to refer either to persons who currently are drinking excessively or to people who have stopped drinking but must, according to AA philosophy, continue to abstain from alcohol consumption in the future. That is, in the AA view, one is an alcoholic for life, whether or not one is drinking; one is never “cured” of alcoholism but is instead “in recovery.” An important aspect of AA’s rehabilitation program is that it appears to lift the burden of personal responsibility by helping alcoholics accept that alcoholism, like many other problems, is bigger than they are. Henceforth, they can see themselves not as weak willed or lacking in moral strength but rather simply as having an affliction—they cannot drink—just as other people may not be able to tolerate certain types of medication. Through mutual help and reassurance from group members who have had similar experiences, many alcoholics acquire insight into their problems, a new sense of purpose, greater ego strength, and more effective coping techniques. Continued participation in the group, of course, can help prevent the crisis of a relapse. Affiliated movements such as Al-Anon family groups and Ala- teen (which has over 35,000 groups in the United States and Canada) are designed to bring family members together to share experiences and problems, to gain understanding of the nature of alcoholism, and to learn techniques for dealing with their own problems living in a family with one or more affected individuals. The reported success of Alcoholics Anonymous is based pri- marily on anecdotal information rather than on objective study of treatment outcomes because AA does not directly participate in external comparative research efforts. However, several studies have found AA conditions effective in helping people avoid drink- ing (Kelly, Stout et al., 2010). In a classic study, Brandsma and colleagues (1980) included an AA program in their extensive com- parative study of alcoholism treatments. The success of this treat- ment method with severe alcoholics was found to be quite limited. Another important finding was that the AA method had high drop- out rates compared with other therapies. About half of the people who go to AA drop out of the program within 3 months. Chappel (1993) attributes the very high dropout rate to alcoholics’ denial that they have problems, resistance to external pressure, and resis- tance to AA itself. Apparently many alcoholics are unable to accept the quasireligious quality of the sessions and the group-testimonial format that is so much a part of the AA program. In the Brandsma study, the participants who were assigned to the AA group sub- sequently encountered more life difficulties and drank more than the people in the other treatment groups. On the positive side, however, a study by Morganstern and colleagues (1997) reports that affiliation with AA after alcohol treatment was associated with better outcomes than without such involvement, and a study by Tonigan and colleagues (1995) found that AA involvement was strongly associated with success in outpatient samples.  These people are participating in an Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meeting. AA accepts both teenagers and adults, has no dues or fees, does not keep records or case histories, does not participate in political causes, and is not affiliated with any religious sect, although spiritual development is a key aspect of its treatment approach. To ensure anonymity, only first names are used at meetings. AA is one of the most popular alcohol-treatment programs, promoting total abstinence rather than controlled drinking.
oUTCoME STUDiES AnD iSSUES in TREATMEnT   The out- come of treatment for alcohol-related disorders varies consider- ably, depending on the population studied and on the treatment facilities and procedures employed. Results range from low rates of success for hard-core substance abusers to recovery rates of 70 to 90 percent when modern treatment and aftercare procedures are used. Substance abusers who are also diagnosed as having a personality disorder or mood disorder tend to have poorer out- comes in alcohol treatment than those for whom the diagnosis is simply alcohol-abuse problems (Woelwer et al., 2001). Treat- ment is most likely to be effective when an individual realizes that she or he needs help, when adequate treatment facilities are available, and when the individual attends treatment regularly. Having a positive relationship with the therapist is also associ- ated with better treatment outcome (Connors et al., 1997). One important treatment strategy is aimed at reinforcing treatment motivation and abstinence early in the treatment process by providing “check-up” follow-ups on drinking behavior. Miller and colleagues (1993) report that “Drinking Check-Up” ses- sions during the early stages of therapy resulted in a reduction of drinking in the first 6 weeks of therapy compared with clients who did not have check-up sessions. Some researchers have maintained that treatment for alcohol-use and -abuse disorders would be more effective if impor- tant patient characteristics were taken into account (Mattson et al., 1994). That is, patients with certain personality characteristics or with differing degrees of severity might do better with one specific therapeutic approach rather than with another. This view was evaluated in a study of patient–treatment matching (referred to as “Project MATCH”) that was sponsored by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA, 1997). This extensive study, initiated in 1989, involved 1,726 patients who were treated in 26 alcohol-treatment programs in the United States by 80 dif- ferent therapists representing three treatment approaches. The research design included both inpatient and outpatient treatment components. The results of this study were unexpected: Matching the patients to particular treatments did not appear to be impor- tant to having an effective outcome because the treatments studied all had equal outcomes. Gordis (1997) concludes that patients from competently run alcoholism-treatment programs will do as well in any of the three treatments studied.  RElAPSE PREvEnTion   One of the greatest problems in the treatment of addictive disorders is maintaining abstinence or self- control once the behavioral excesses have been checked (Tims et al., 2001). Most alcohol-treatment programs show high suc- cess rates in “curing” the addictive problems, but many programs show lessening rates of abstinence or controlled drinking at various periods of follow-up. Many treatment programs do not pay enough attention to maintaining effective behavior and preventing relapse into previous maladaptive patterns (Miller & Rollnick, 2003). Given that alcohol-dependent people are highly vulnerable to relapse, some researchers have focused on the need to help them remain abstinent. In one cognitive-behavioral approach, relapse behavior is a key factor in alcohol treatment (Witkiewitz & Marlatt, 2007). One recent study (Nattala et al., 2010) found that relapse prevention treatment worked most effectively when family members were involved in the treatment. The behaviors underlying relapse are seen as “indulgent behaviors” that are based on an individual’s learning history. When an individual is abstinent or has an addiction under con- trol, she or he gains a sense of personal control over the indul- gent behavior. The longer the person is able to maintain this control, the greater the sense of achievement—the self-efficacy or confidence—and the greater the chance that she or he will be able to cope with the addiction and maintain control. However, a person may violate this rule of abstinence through a gradual, perhaps unconscious, process rather than through the sudden “falling off the wagon” that constitutes the traditional view of craving and relapse. In the cognitive-behavioral view, a person may, even while maintaining abstinence, inadvertently make a series of mini-decisions that begin a chain of behaviors that ren- der relapse inevitable. For example, an abstinent alcohol abuser who buys a quart of bourbon just in case his friends drop by is unconsciously preparing the way for relapse. Another type of relapse behavior involves the “abstinence vio- lation effect,” in which even minor transgressions are seen by the abstainer as having drastic significance. The effect works this way: An abstinent person may hold that she or he should not, under any circumstance, transgress or give in to the old habit. Absti- nence-oriented treatment programs are particularly guided by this prohibitive rule. What happens, then, when an abstinent person becomes somewhat self-indulgent and takes a drink offered by an old friend or joins in a wedding toast? He or she may lose some of the sense of self-efficacy—confidence—needed to control his or her drinking. Feeling guilty about having technically violated the vow of abstinence, the person may rationalize that he or she “has blown it and become a drunk again, so why not go all the way?” In   relapse prevention treatment , clients are taught to rec- ognize the apparently irrelevant decisions that serve as early warning signals of the possibility of relapse. High-risk situations such as parties or sports events are targeted, and the individuals  Appealing advertisements and displays that encourage drinking can make abstinence particularly difficult and can contribute, at the very least on a subconscious level, to a relapse.
learn to assess their own vulnerability to relapse. Clients are also trained not to become so discouraged that if they do relapse they lose their confidence. Some cognitive-behavioral therapists have even incorporated a “planned relapse” phase into the treatment. Research with relapse prevention strategies has shown them to be effective in providing continuing improvement over time (Rawson et al., 2002). In other words, when patients are taught to expect a relapse, they are better able to handle it.  in review  •   What is the difference between alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence?  •   What are the major physiological effects of alcohol?  •   Identify the physical, interpersonal, and social/occupational problems that can result from chronic alcohol use.  •   What neurobiological processes underlie addiction?  •   What are the five major psychosocial causal factors that may contribute to alcohol abuse and dependence?  •   Describe four psychosocial interventions used to treat alcohol dependence.  Drug Abuse and Dependence  Aside from alcohol, the psychoactive drugs most commonly associated with abuse and dependence in our society appear to be (1) narcotics such as opiates or opioids, including opium and heroin; (2) sedatives such as barbiturates; (3) stimulants such as cocaine and amphetamines; (4) antianxiety drugs such as benzo- diazepines; (5) pain medications such as OxyContin (Whoriskey, 2013); (6) hallucinogens such as LSD (the effects of these and other drugs are summarized in Table 11.2); and (7) caffeine and nicotine, which are also drugs of dependence (disorders asso- ciated with tobacco withdrawal and caffeine intoxication are included in the   DSM-5   diagnostic classification system). An estimated 20.1 million Americans who are 12 years of age or older reported using an illicit drug during the month before a recent survey. This represents 8.0 percent of the population (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2009). According to the Monitoring the Future Study, in 2008 the annual prevalence rate of using any illicit drug was 37 percent for 12th graders, 35 percent for college students, 34 percent for 19- to 28-year-olds, 27 percent for  table   11.2  Psychoactive Drugs Commonly involved in Drug Abuse Classification   Drug   Effect  Sedatives   Alcohol (ethanol)   Reduce tension Facilitate social interaction “Blot out” feelings or events Barbiturates   Reduce tension Nembutal (pentobarbital) Seconal (secobarbital) Veronal (barbital) Tuinal (secobarbital and amobarbital) Stimulants   Amphetamines   Increase feelings of alertness and confidence Benzedrine (amphetamine) Dexedrine (dextroamphetamine)   Decrease feelings of fatigue Methedrine (methamphetamine)   Stay awake for long periods Cocaine (coca)   Increase endurance Stimulate sex drive Opiates   Opium and its derivatives   Alleviate physical pain Opium   Induce relaxation and pleasant reverie Morphine   Alleviate anxiety and tension Codeine Heroin Methadone (synthetic narcotic)   Treatment of heroin dependence Hallucinogens   Cannabis   Induce changes in mood, thought, and behavior Marijuana Hashish Mescaline (peyote)   “Expand” one’s mind Psilocybin (psychotogenic mushrooms)   Induce stupor LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide-25) PCP (phencyclidine) Antianxiety drugs   Librium (chlordiazepoxide)   Alleviate tension and anxiety (minor tranquilizers)   Miltown (meprobamate)   Induce relaxation and sleep Valium (diazepam) Xanax Note: This list is by no means complete; for example, it does not include drugs such as Ritalin, which are designed to produce multiple effects; it does not include the less commonly used volatile hydrocarbons such as glue, paint thinner, gasoline, cleaning fluid, and nail polish remover, which are highly dangerous when sniffed for their psychoactive effects; and it does not include the antipsychotic and antidepressant drugs, which are abused, but relatively rarely. We shall deal with these and the antianxiety drugs in our discussion of drug therapy in  6.
10th graders, and 14 percent for 8th graders (Johnston et al., 2009). The extent of drug abuse in the population is likely to be underestimated because many abusers do not seek help (Comp- ton et al., 2007). Although they may occur at any age, drug abuse and dependence are most common during adolescence and young adulthood (Campbell, 2010) and vary according to metropolitan area, race and ethnicity, labor force status, and other demographic characteristics (Hughes, 1992). Substance- abuse problems are relatively more prominent in economically depressed minority communities (Akins et al., 2003). The extent to which drug abuse has become a problem for soci- ety is reflected in a study of drug involvement among applicants for employment at a large teaching hospital in Maryland (Lange et al., 1994). Beginning in 1989, and for a 2-year period, all appli- cants for employment were screened through a preemployment drug-screening program (individuals were not identified in the initial study). Of 593 applicants, 10.8 percent were found to have detect- able amounts of illicit drugs in their systems. The most frequently detected drug was marijuana (55 percent of those who tested posi- tively), followed by cocaine (36 percent) and opiates (28 percent). The impact of drug use among employed people has also been reported to be significant. In an extensive survey of illegal drug use among 40,000 currently employed workers, researchers found the following rates of illicit drug use within the month prior to the survey: 19 percent for those age 18 or younger, 10.3 percent for those between 18 and 25, 7 percent for those between 26 and 34, 7 percent for those between 35 and 49, and 2.6 percent for those between 50 and 64 (Larson et al., 2007). The overall frequency of illegal drug use rate in this work sample was 8.2 percent. The high rate of drug use in this population (many reported actually using drugs on the job) is problematic. For example, among those work- ers who reported current illicit drug use, 12.3 percent reported that they had worked for three or more employers in the past year, compared with 5.1 percent for nonabusing workers. Among people who abuse drugs, behavior patterns vary markedly depending on the type, amount, and duration of drug use; on the physiological and psychological makeup of the indi- vidual; and, in some instances, on the social setting in which the drug experience occurs. Thus it appears most useful to deal sepa- rately with some of the drugs that are more commonly associated with abuse and dependence in contemporary society.  opium and its Derivatives (narcotics) oPiUM   People have used opium and its derivatives for centu- ries. Galen (a.d. 130–201) considered theriaca, whose principal ingredient was opium, to be a panacea: It resists poison and venomous bites, cures inveterate headache, vertigo, deafness, epilepsy, apoplexy, dimness of sight, loss of voice, asthma, coughs of all kinds, spitting of blood, tightness of breath, colic, the iliac poisons, jaundice, hardness of the spleen, stone, urinary complaints, fevers, dropsies, leprosies, the trouble to which women are subject, melancholy and all pestilences. (See Brock, 1979, for a dis- cussion of Galen.) Even today, opiates are still used for some of the conditions Galen mentioned.  Opium   is a mixture of about 18 chemical substances known as alkaloids. In 1805, the alkaloid present in the largest amount (10 to 15 percent) was found to be a bitter-tasting powder that could serve as a powerful sedative and pain reliever; it was named  morphine   after Morpheus, the god of sleep in Greek mythol- ogy. The hypodermic needle was introduced in America around 1856, allowing morphine to be widely administered to soldiers during the Civil War—not only to those wounded in battle but also to those suffering from dysentery. As a consequence, many Civil War veterans returned to civilian life addicted to the drug, a condition euphemistically referred to as “soldier’s illness.” Scientists concerned with the addictive properties of mor- phine hypothesized that one part of the morphine molecule might be responsible for its analgesic properties (that is, its abil- ity to eliminate pain without inducing unconsciousness) and another for its addictiveness. At about the turn of the century, it was discovered that if morphine was treated with an inexpensive and readily available chemical called acetic anhydride, it would be converted into another powerful analgesic called   heroin . Her- oin was hailed enthusiastically by its discoverer, Heinrich Dreser (Boehm, 1968). Leading scientists of his time agreed on the merits of heroin, and the drug came to be widely prescribed in place of morphine for pain relief and related medicinal purposes. However, heroin was a cruel disappointment, for it proved to be an even more dangerous drug than morphine, acting more rap- idly and more intensely and being equally, if not more addictive. Eventually, heroin was removed from use in medical practice. As it became apparent that opium and its derivatives— including codeine, which is used in some cough syrups—were perilously addictive, the U.S. Congress enacted the Harrison Act in 1914. Under this and later legislation, the unauthorized sale and distribution of certain drugs became a federal offense;  The adolescent shown here is injecting the drug heroin—a dangerous and highly addictive substance that is widely available to adolescents today.
physicians and pharmacists were held accountable for each dose they dispensed. Thus, overnight, the role of a chronic narcotic user changed from that of addict—whose addiction was consid- ered a vice, but was tolerated—to that of criminal. Unable to obtain drugs through legal sources, many turned to illegal chan- nels, and eventually to other criminal acts, as a means of main- taining their suddenly expensive drug supply. In one survey, about 2.4 million Americans acknowledged having tried heroin, and almost a quarter of a million people admitted to using it within the previous 12 months (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1997). In 2005, heroin overdose accounted for 10 percent of all drug-abuse- related emergency room admissions (DAWN Report, 2010).  BiologiCAl EffECTS of MoRPhinE AnD hERoin   Mor- phine and heroin are commonly introduced into the body by smoking, snorting (inhaling the powder), eating, “skin popping,” or “mainlining,” the last two being methods of introducing the drug via hypodermic injection. Skin popping is injecting the liq- uefied drug just beneath the skin, while mainlining is injecting the drug directly into the bloodstream. In the United States, a young addict usually moves from snorting to mainlining. Among the immediate effects of mainlined or snorted heroin is a euphoric spasm (the rush) lasting 60 seconds or so, which many addicts compare to a sexual orgasm. However, vom- iting and nausea have also been known to be part of the immedi- ate effects of heroin and morphine use. This rush is followed by a high, during which an addict typically is in a lethargic, with- drawn state in which bodily needs, including needs for food and sex, are markedly diminished; pleasant feelings of relaxation and euphoria tend to dominate. These effects last from 4 to 6 hours and are followed—in addicts—by a negative phase that produces a desire for more of the drug. The use of opiates over a period of time generally results in a physiological craving for the drug. The time required to establish the drug habit varies, but it has been estimated that continual use over a period of 30 days is sufficient. Users then find that they have become physiologically dependent on the drug in the sense that they feel physically ill when they do not take it. In addition, users of opiates gradually build up a tolerance to the drug so increasingly larger amounts are needed to achieve the desired effects. When people addicted to opiates do not get a dose of the drug within approximately 8 hours, they start to experience withdrawal symptoms. The character and severity of these reac- tions depend on many factors including the amount of the nar- cotic habitually used, the intervals between doses, the duration of the addiction, and especially the addict’s health and personality. Withdrawal from heroin is not always dangerous or even very painful. Many addicted people withdraw without assis- tance. Withdrawal can, however, be an agonizing experience for some people, with symptoms including runny nose, tearing eyes, perspiration, restlessness, increased respiration rate, and an intensified desire for the drug. As time passes, the symptoms may become more severe. Typically, a feeling of chilliness alter- nates with flushing and excessive sweating, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, pains in the back and extremities, severe headache, marked tremors, and varying degrees of insomnia. Beset by these discomforts, an individual refuses food and water, and this, coupled with the vomiting, sweating, and diarrhea, results in dehydration and weight loss. Occasionally, symptoms include delirium, hallucinations, and manic activity. Cardiovas- cular collapse may also occur and can result in death. If morphine is administered, the subjective distress experienced by an addict temporarily ends and physiological balance is quickly restored. Withdrawal symptoms are usually on the decline by the third or fourth day and by the seventh or eighth day have disap- peared. As the symptoms subside, the person resumes normal eating and drinking and rapidly regains lost weight. After with- drawal symptoms have ceased, the individual’s former tolerance for the drug is reduced; as a result, there is a risk that taking the former large dosage might result in overdose.  SoCiAl EffECTS of MoRPhinE AnD hERoin   Typically, the life of a person addicted to opiates becomes increasingly centered on obtaining and using drugs, so the addiction usually leads to socially maladaptive behavior as the individual is eventu- ally forced to lie, steal, and associate with undesirable contacts to maintain a supply of drugs. Many addicts resort to petty theft to support their habits, and some addicts turn to prostitution as a means of financing their addictions. Along with the lowering of ethical and moral restraints, addic- tion has adverse physical effects on an individual’s well-being—for example, disruption of the immune system (Theodorou & Haber, 2005). Lifestyle factors can lead to further problems; an inadequate diet, for example, may lead to ill health and increased susceptibility to a variety of physical ailments. The use of unsterile equipment may also lead to various problems including liver damage from hepatitis ( Lucey et al. 2009) and transmission of the AIDS virus. In addition, the use of such a potent drug without medical supervi- sion and government controls to ensure its strength and purity can result in fatal overdose. Injection of too much heroin can cause coma and death. In fact, heroin-related deaths have shown an increase in cities where data are collected (DAWN Report, 2006) and among soldiers in Afganistan where eight deaths were recorded from opiates in 2011 (Martinez, 2011). The most common drug- related deaths in the United States involve combinations of heroin, cocaine, and alcohol. Women who use heroin during pregnancy subject their unborn children to the risk of dire consequences. One tragic outcome is premature babies who are themselves addicted to heroin and vulnerable to a number of diseases. Addiction to opiates usually leads to a gradual deterioration of well-being (Brown & Lo, 2000). For example, some research has shown that opiates actively alter the immune system, render- ing the person vulnerable to organ damage (McHugh & Kreek, 2004). The ill health and general personality degeneration often found in opiate addiction do not always result directly from
the pharmacological effects of the drug, however; rather, they are often products of the sacrifices of money, proper diet, social position, and self-respect as an addict becomes more desperate to procure the required daily dosage.  CAUSAl fACToRS in oPiATE ABUSE AnD DEPEnDEnCE  No single causal pattern fits all addictions to opiate drugs. Kendler and Sundquist (2012) recently reported that drug abuse is etiologically complex involving both genetic and environmen- tal influences. A study by Fulmer and Lapidus (1980) concludes that the three most frequently cited reasons for beginning to use heroin were pleasure, curiosity, and peer pressure. Pleasure was, by far, the single most widespread reason—given by 81 percent of addicts. Other reasons such as a desire to escape life stress, personal maladjustment, and sociocultural conditions also play a part. Zuckerman (2007) provided the view that substance abuse such as smoking, drinking, and the use of drugs are all related to a personality characteristic he refers to as “sensation seeking.” He considered this trait to be mediated through genetic and biologi- cal mechanisms as well as through peer influences.  nEURAl BASES foR PhySiologiCAl ADDiCTion   Research teams have isolated and studied receptor sites for narcotic drugs in the brain (Goldstein et al., 1974). Such receptor sites are spe- cific nerve cells into which given psychoactive drugs fit like keys into the proper locks. This interaction of drug and brain cells apparently results in a drug’s action and, in the case of narcotic drugs, may lead to addiction. The repeated use of opiates results in changes in the neurotransmitter systems that regulate incentive and motivation and the ability to manage stress (DeVries & Ship- penberg, 2002). Research has demonstrated that heroin users show a number of CNS dysfunctions including slowed reaction time, impaired learning and attention, impaired cognitive processing, and impulse control problems (Angelucci et al., 2007). The human body produces its own opium-like substances, called   endorphins , in the brain and pituitary gland. These sub- stances are produced in response to stimulation and are believed to play a role in an organism’s reaction to pain. Some investiga- tors have suspected that endorphins play a role in drug addic- tion, speculating that chronic underproduction of endorphins leads to a craving for narcotic drugs. Research on the role of endorphins in drug addiction has generally been inconclusive, and no effective treatment has resulted from this line of research.  ADDiCTion ASSoCiATED wiTh PSyChoPAThology  A high incidence of antisocial personality has been found among heroin addicts (Alterman, et al., 1998; Feske et al., 2006). In a comparison between a group of 45 young institutionalized male addicts and a control group of nonaddicts, Gilbert and Lombardi (1967) found that the distinguishing features were “the addict’s antisocial traits, his depression, tension, insecurity, and feelings of inadequacy, and his difficulty in forming warm and lasting inter- personal relationships” (p. 536). Meyer and Mirin (1979) found that opiate addicts are highly impulsive and unable to delay grati- fication. Kosten and Rounsaville (1986) reported that about 68 percent of heroin abusers are also diagnosed as having a personal- ity disorder. As in the case of alcoholism, however, it is essential to exercise caution in distinguishing between personality traits pres- ent before and those present after addiction; the high incidence of psychopathology among narcotics addicts may in part result from, rather than precede, the long-term effects of addiction.  DRUg USE ASSoCiATED wiTh SoCioCUlTURAl fACToRS  In our society, a so-called narcotics subculture exists in which addicts can obtain drugs and protect themselves against society’s sanctions (Johnson, 2007). The decision to join this culture has important future implications, for from that point on, addicts’ activities will revolve around their drug-user role. In short,  Celebrities Lindsay Lohan and Paris Hilton have received jail terms for substance-related driving offenses.
addiction becomes a way of life. In a survey of three large cities in Texas, Maddux and colleagues (1994) found that the majority of illicit drug injectors were undereducated and unemployed indi- viduals from minority groups. With time, most young addicts who join the drug culture become increasingly withdrawn, indifferent to their friends (except those in the drug group), and apathetic about sexual activity (Tremble et al., 1994). They are likely to abandon scho- lastic and athletic endeavors and to show a marked reduction in competitive and achievement strivings. Most of these addicts appear to lack clear sex-role identification and to experience feel- ings of inadequacy when confronted with the demands of adult- hood. They feel progressively isolated from the broader culture, but their feelings of group belongingness are bolstered by con- tinued association with the addict milieu. At the same time, they come to view drugs both as a means of revolt against authority and conventional values and as a device for alleviating personal anxieties and tensions.  TREATMEnTS AnD oUTCoMES   Treatment for opiate addic- tion is initially similar to that for alcoholism in that it involves building up an addict both physically and psychologically and providing help through the withdrawal period. Addicts often dread the discomfort of withdrawal, but in a hospital setting it is less abrupt and usually involves the administration of medication that eases the distress. After physical withdrawal has been completed, treatment focuses on helping a former addict make an adequate adjustment to his or her community and abstain from the further use of opi- ates. Traditionally, however, the prognosis has been unfavorable, with many clients dropping out of treatment (Katz et al., 2004). Withdrawal from heroin does not remove the craving for the drug. Thus a key target in treatment of heroin addiction must be the alleviation of this craving. One approach to dealing with the physiological craving for heroin was pioneered by a research team at Rockefeller University in New York. It involved the use of the drug   methadone   in conjunction with a rehabilitation pro- gram (counseling, group therapy, and other procedures) directed toward the “total resocialization” of addicts. Methadone hydro- chloride is a synthetic narcotic that is related to heroin and is equally addictive physiologically. Its usefulness in treatment lies in the fact that it satisfies an addict’s craving for heroin without producing serious psychological impairment, if only because it is administered as a “treatment” in a formal clinical context and can result in reduced drug use and improved cognitive perfor- mance (Gruber et al., 2006; Kreek et al., 2010). (See the Unre- solved Issues section at the end of this chapter.) Other medications, such as buprenorphine, have also been used to treat heroin addiction (Meier & Patkar, 2007). Buprenorphine promises to be as effective a substitute for heroin as methadone but with fewer side effects (Ling et al., 2010). It operates as a partial antagonist to heroin and produces the feel- ings of contentment associated with heroin use (Mendelson & Mello, 1992). Yet the drug does not produce the physical depen- dence that is characteristic of heroin (Grant & Sonti, 1994) and can be discontinued without severe withdrawal symptoms. Like methadone, buprenorphine appears to work best at maintaining abstinence if it is provided along with behavior therapy (Bickel et al., 1997).  Cocaine and Amphetamines (Stimulants)  In contrast to narcotics, which depress (slow down) the action of the CNS, cocaine and amphetamines stimulate it (speed it up).  CoCAinE   Like opium,   cocaine   is a plant product discovered in ancient times and used ever since. It was widely used in the pre- Columbian world of Mexico and Peru (Guerra, 1971). Because for many years it was typically very costly in the United States, co- caine was considered as the “high” for the affluent. However, with more widespread availability and lowering of prices, the drug’s use increased significantly in the United States during the 1980s and 1990s—to the point where its use was considered epidemic, es- pecially among middle- and upper-income groups. “Crack” is the street name that is applied to cocaine that has been processed from cocaine hydrochloride to a free base for smoking. The name refers to the crackling sound emitted when the mixture is heated. In 2008, cocaine use was reported in 1.5 percent of young adults (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2009). In 2005, there was a substantial increase in cocaine-related emergency room visits per 100,000 drug-related admissions (about 29 percent of drug-related emergencies). This amount is about three times greater than heroin-related admissions (DAWN Report, 2010). Like the opiates, cocaine may be ingested by sniffing, swallowing, or injecting. Also like the opiates, it precipitates a euphoric state of 4 to 6 hours’ duration, during which a user experiences feelings of confidence and contentment. However, this blissful state may be preceded by headache, dizziness, and restlessness. When cocaine is chronically abused, acute toxic psychotic symptoms may occur, including frightening visual, auditory, and tactual hallucinations similar to those in acute schizophrenia. Unlike the opiates, cocaine stimulates the cortex of the brain, inducing sleeplessness and excitement as well as stimulat- ing and accentuating sexual feelings. Dependence on cocaine also differs somewhat from dependence on opiates. It was formerly believed that tolerance was not increased appreciably with cocaine use. However, acute tolerance has now been dem- onstrated, and some chronic tolerance may occur as well. More- over, cognitive impairment associated with cocaine abuse is likely to be an important consideration in long-term effects of the drug (Abi-Saab et al., 2005; Mann, 2004). The previous view that cocaine abusers did not develop physiological dependence on the drug also has changed. Gawin and Kleber (1986) demonstrated that chronic abusers who become abstinent develop uniform, depression-like symptoms, but the symptoms are transient. Our
broadened knowledge about cocaine abuse, particularly with respect to the many health and social problems resulting from dependence on the drug, has resulted in considerable modifica- tion of professional views of cocaine over the past 20 years. For example, the modifications in the   DSM-5   diagnostic classifica- tion reflect a significant increase in our knowledge of cocaine’s addictive properties. A new disorder is described—cocaine withdrawal—that involves symptoms of depression, fatigue, disturbed sleep, and increased dreaming (Foltin & Fischman, 1997). The psychological and life problems experienced by cocaine users are often great. Employment, family, psychological, and legal problems are all more likely to occur among cocaine and crack users than among nonusers. Many life problems expe- rienced by cocaine abusers result in part from the considerable amounts of money that are required to support their habits. Increased sexual activity, often trading sex for drugs, has been associated with crack cocaine use (Weatherby et al., 1992), as has engaging in sexual activity with anonymous partners (Balshem et al., 1992). However, problems in sexual functioning have been reported to be associated with crack cocaine use. Kim and colleagues (1992) report that most users lose interest in sex and develop sexual dysfunction with prolonged usage. Women who use cocaine when they are pregnant place their babies at risk for both health and psychological problems. Although research has suggested that there is no “fetal crack syndrome” similar to what has been shown with alcohol-abusing mothers (Azar, 1997), children of crack-using mothers are at risk of being maltreated as infants as well as of losing their moth- ers during infancy. Wasserman and Leventhal (1993) studied a group of cocaine-exposed children and a control sample of non- exposed children for a 24-month period following their birth. They found that children who were regularly exposed to cocaine  in utero   were more likely to be mistreated (23 percent compared with only 4 percent of controls).  TREATMEnT AnD oUTCoMES   Treatment for dependence on cocaine does not differ appreciably from that for other drugs that involve physiological dependence (see Kosten et al., 1992; Schmitz et al., 2004). In order to reduce cravings as part of psy- chological therapy and to ensure treatment compliance, drugs such as naltrexone have been used to reduce cocaine use (Carroll et al., 2004). The feelings of tension and depression that ac- company absence of the drug have to be dealt with during the immediate withdrawal period. One recent study reported that methadone was effective in promoting abstinence among indi- viduals with less severe cocaine use (Weinstock et al., 2010) Some success in the treatment of cocaine abusers has been reported. For example, Siqueland and colleagues (2002) found that patients who remained in drug treatment longer used drugs less often after treatment than those who dropped out; and Stewart, Gossop, and Marsden (2002) found that patients who completed therapy had lower rates of drug overdose than those who failed to complete treatment. Carroll and colleagues (1993) have shown that many cocaine abusers do well in maintain- ing treatment goals, and one-third are abstinent at a 12-month follow-up. They found several factors associated with poorer outcomes: severity of abuse, poorer psychiatric functioning, and presence of concurrent alcoholism. Higgins, Badger, and Budney (2000) found that people who were not able to sustain abstinence during the treatment had poorer outcomes following therapy. One of the problems clinicians face in working with cocaine abusers is their “dropping out”: Only 42 percent of those in one study remained in treatment for six or more sessions (Kleinman et al., 1992). Another problem encountered in drug treatment is that many of the cocaine-dependent patients have severe antisocial personality disorder—a situation resulting in treat- ment resistance (Poling et al., 2007)—or are “psychosis-prone” personalities (Kwapil, 1996). Arndt and colleagues (1994) found that cocaine-dependent patients with antisocial personality char- acteristics made few therapeutic gains, whereas those without antisocial features made significant progress. Gallop and col- leagues (2007) report a study in which gender differences were found for being able to maintain abstinence from cocaine use; men tended to have more problems transitioning to abstinence after cocaine abuse. Is treatment always necessary for cocaine abusers to recover? An interesting study suggests that some abusers can improve without therapy. Toneatto and colleagues (1999) describe a study of natural (nontreated) recovery among cocaine abusers. They report that abusers who resolved their dependence on cocaine were similar to those who did not resolve their cocaine problems in terms of demographic characteristics, substance abuse, and psychiatric history. The successful abstainers consid- ered their “improved self-concept” crucial to their success.  AMPhETAMinES   The earliest   amphetamine   to be introduced—Benzedrine, or amphetamine sulfate—was first synthesized in 1927 and became available in drugstores in the early 1930s as an inhalant to relieve stuffy noses. However, the manufacturers soon learned that some customers were chew- ing the wicks in the inhalers for “kicks.” Thus the stimulating effects of amphetamine sulfate were discovered by the pub- lic before the drug was formally prescribed as a stimulant by physicians. In the late 1930s, two newer amphetamines were introduced—Dexedrine (dextroamphetamine) and Methedrine (methamphetamine hydrochloride, also known as “speed”). The latter preparation is a far more potent stimulant of the CNS than either Benzedrine or Dexedrine and hence is considered more dangerous. In fact, its abuse can be lethal. Initially these preparations were considered to be “won- der pills” that helped people stay alert and awake and function temporarily at a level beyond normal. During World War II, military interest was aroused in the stimulating effects of these drugs, and they were used by both Allied and German soldiers to ward off fatigue (Jarvik, 1967). Similarly, among civilians,
amphetamines came to be widely used by night workers, long- distance truck drivers, students cramming for exams, and athletes striving to improve their performances. It was also discovered that amphetamines tend to suppress appetite, and they became popular with people trying to lose weight. In addition, they were often used to counteract the effects of barbiturates or other sleep- ing pills that had been taken the night before. As a result of their many uses, amphetamines were widely prescribed by doctors. Today amphetamines are occasionally used medically for curbing the appetite when weight reduction is desirable; for treating individuals suffering from narcolepsy, a disorder in which people cannot prevent themselves from continually fall- ing asleep during the day; and for treating hyperactive children. Curiously enough, amphetamines have a calming rather than a stimulating effect on many of these young people. Amphet- amines are also sometimes prescribed for alleviating mild feelings of depression, relieving fatigue, and maintaining alertness for sustained periods of time. By far, however, the most frequent use of amphetamines is for recreational purposes, the most typical user being a young person interested in the high that the drug induces (Klee, 1998). Since the passage of the Controlled Substance Act of 1970 (Drug Enforcement Administration, 1979), amphetamines have been classified as Schedule II controlled substances—that is, drugs with high abuse potential that require a prescription for each purchase. As a result, medical use of amphetamines has declined in the United States in recent years, and they are more difficult to obtain legally. However, it is often easy to find illegal sources of amphetamines, which thus remain among the most widely abused drugs. Amphetamines are among the most widely used illicit drugs in other countries as well, for example, in Australia (Lintzeris, Holgate et al., 1996). In 2007, about 5 per- cent of drug-related emergency room visits involved amphet- amines or methamphetamines (DAWN Report, 2010).  EffECTS of AMPhETAMinE ABUSE   Despite their legiti- mate medical uses, amphetamines are not a magical source of extra mental or physical energy. Instead, they push users toward greater expenditures of their own resources—often to the point of hazardous fatigue. Amphetamines are psychologically and physically addictive, and the body rapidly builds up tolerance to them (Wise, 1996). Thus habituated abusers may use the drugs in amounts that would be lethal to nonusers. In some instances, users inject the drug to get faster and more intense results. For a person who exceeds prescribed dosages, amphetamine consumption results in heightened blood pressure, enlarged pupils, unclear or rapid speech, profuse sweating, tremors, excit- ability, loss of appetite, confusion, and sleeplessness. Injected in large quantities, Methedrine can raise blood pressure enough to cause immediate death. In addition, chronic abuse of amphet- amines can result in brain damage and a wide range of psy- chopathology, including a disorder known as “amphetamine psychosis,” which appears similar to paranoid schizophrenia. Suicide, homicide, assault, and various other acts of violence are also associated with amphetamine abuse.  TREATMEnTS AnD oUTCoMES   Research on the effective- ness of various treatments for withdrawing patients from am- phetamines is scarce (Baker & Lee, 2003). Although withdrawal from amphetamines is usually safe, some evidence suggests that physiological dependence upon the drug is an important fac- tor to consider in treatment (Wise & Munn, 1995). In some instances, abrupt withdrawal from the chronic, excessive use of amphetamines can result in cramping, nausea, diarrhea, and even convulsions. Moreover, abrupt abstinence commonly results in feelings of weariness and depression. The depression usually peaks in 48 to 72 hours, often remains intense for a day or two, and then tends to lessen gradually over a period of several days. Mild feelings of depression and lassitude may persist for weeks or even months. If brain damage has occurred, the residual ef- fects may include impaired ability to concentrate, learn, and remember, with resulting social, economic, and personality deterioration.  Methamphetamine  Methamphetamine, referred to on the streets as “crystal” or “ice” because of its appearance, is a highly addictive stimulant drug that can provide a quick and long-lasting “high.” However, it is one of the most dangerous illegal drugs because of its treacherous properties and its unwelcome results (Covey, 2007). Methamphetamine is a form of amphetamine that can be “cooked” in large quantities in makeshift laboratories in out- of-the-way places that defy and frustrate detection. This drug is relatively cheap to manufacture and is often referred to as “poor people’s cocaine.” It can be manufactured, for example, in a por- table cooler with ingredients that can be legally obtained from any drugstore. The drug can be ingested in a variety of ways, through smoking, snorting, swallowing, or injecting. The drug’s effects can be almost instantaneous if it is smoked or injected. Methamphetamine operates by increasing the level of dopamine in the brain, and prolonged use of the drug produces structural changes in the brain (Chang, Alicata et al., 2007). The severity of psychiatric symptoms associated with the drug is sig- nificantly related to the duration of use (Yoshimoto et al., 2002).  Methamphetamine, known as “crystal” or “ice,” can be “cooked” in large quantities in make- shift laboratories. The man shown in this photo was arrested in a police raid on one such laboratory.
Moreover, discontinuing the drug after the person has become habituated can result in problems with learning, memory, and cog- nitive dysfunction (Cretzmeyer et al., 2003; Rothman et al., 2000) and severe mental health problems such as paranoid thinking and hallucinations (Brecht et al., 2004; Srisurapanont et al., 2003). This drug is metabolized more slowly than other drugs such as cocaine and produces a high for a longer period of time. When the drug wears off or when users “come down from the high,” they are likely to feel extremely weak, lethargic, sleepy, and depressed. Use of the drug increased substantially during the 1990s; 4.9 million people in the United States (2.3 percent of the popu- lation) had tried methamphetamine by 1998 (NIDA, 2003). In one survey of almost 630,000 high school students, Oetting and colleagues (2000) report that methamphetamine use more than doubled between 1989 and 1996. The number of people starting to use methamphetamine decreased in 2008 and was signifi- cantly lower than it was in 2007 (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2009). Interestingly, the use of methamphetamine in the United States has been somewhat of a regional phenomenon; most use has occurred in the Southwest, on the West Coast, and in Hawaii, with very little use in the North, South, and Midwest (DAWN, 2007). This situation results from the fact that meth labs have been concentrated in Mexico, California, and Hawaii. There is some evidence that people become more quickly addicted to methamphetamine and require treatment sooner than those using cocaine (Castro et al., 2000). Addicted meth- amphetamine users are highly resistant to treatment, and post- treatment relapse is common. In one California study of 98 methamphetamine abusers, the investigators reported that over half of the participants had returned to methamphetamine use by the time they were interviewed 2 to 3 years following therapy; 36 percent reported that they had returned to methamphetamine use within 6 months of therapy (Brecht et al., 2000).  Barbiturates (Sedatives)  For over a hundred years, powerful sedatives called   barbiturates  have been available as an aid to falling asleep (Lopez-Munoz et al., 2005). Although barbiturates have legitimate medical uses, they are extremely dangerous drugs commonly associated with both physiological and psychological dependence and lethal overdoses.  EffECTS of BARBiTURATES   Barbiturates were once widely used by physicians to calm patients and induce sleep. They act as depressants—somewhat like alcohol—to slow down the action of the CNS (Nemeroff, 2003) and significantly reduce perfor- mance on cognitive tasks (Pickworth et al., 1997). Shortly after taking a barbiturate, or “downer,” an individual experiences a feeling of relaxation in which tensions seem to disappear, fol- lowed by a physical and intellectual lassitude and a tendency toward drowsiness and sleep—the intensity of such feelings de- pends on the type and amount of barbiturate taken. Strong doses produce sleep almost immediately; excessive doses are lethal because they result in paralysis of the brain’s respiratory centers. Impaired decision making and problem solving, sluggishness, slow speech, and sudden mood shifts are also common effects of barbiturates (Lemmer, 2007). Excessive use of barbiturates leads to increased tolerance as well as to physiological and psychological dependence. It can also lead to brain damage and personality deterioration. Unlike tolerance  T here are a number of modifications in the way some dis- orders are diagnosed in   DSM-5   that will likely influence medical treatment with many more patients being treated with stimulant drugs. One of these modified disorders, Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder or ADHD (see  5 for details), results in an expanded population of patients who can receive this diagnosis across the adult years. Although, the diag- nostic criteria for ADHD in   DSM-5   are similar to those in   DSM-IV  for young people, several changes have been introduced in  DSM-5   that expands the application among adults. This change will likely result in many more adults being treated with prescrip- tion drugs for ADHD symptoms. One of the most popular treatments for ADHD in children and adolescents is the drug Methylphenidate (Morton, Gwendolyn, & Stockton, 2000), classified as a CNS stimulant. Methylphenidate, when used intranasally, has receptor effects similar to those of cocaine. These frequently prescribed drugs (Ritalin, Adderall, and Quillivant) are also FDA approved for treatment of adults. The side effects of these medications can result in long-term problems such as sleep problems, headaches, decreased appetite and jitteriness. Moreover, Methylphenidate drugs are addicting and can result in long-term use. The concern over expanded medication use and potential for abuse has been raised by Batstra & Frances (2012) in their re- view of the   DSM-5   committees changes. They pointed out that  DSM-5   will likely trigger a fad of diagnosing Adult Attention Deficit Disorder and lead to widespread misuse of stimulant drugs for performance enhancement and recreation use and will contribute substantially to the already extensive problem of simulant abuse.  DSM- 5  Thinking cRiTically about   DSM-5  Can changes to the diagnostic criteria result in increased drug use?
for opiates, tolerance for barbiturates does not increase the amount needed to cause death. This means that users can easily ingest fatal overdoses, either intentionally or accidentally.  CAUSAl fACToRS in BARBiTURATE ABUSE AnD DEPEn- DEnCE   Although many young people experiment with barbi- turates, most do not become dependent. In fact, the people who do become dependent on barbiturates tend to be middle-aged and older people who often rely on them as “sleeping pills” and who do not commonly use other classes of drugs (except pos- sibly alcohol and minor tranquilizers). These people have been referred to as “silent abusers” because they take the drugs in the privacy of their homes and ordinarily do not become public nuisances. Barbiturates are often used with alcohol. Some users claim they can achieve an intense high by combining barbitu- rates, amphetamines, and alcohol. However, one possible effect of combining barbiturates and alcohol is death because each drug potentiates (increases the action of) the other.  TREATMEnTS AnD oUTCoMES   As with many other drugs, it is often essential in treatment to distinguish between barbiturate intoxication, which results from the toxic effects of overdose, and the symptoms associated with drug withdrawal, because different procedures are required. With barbiturates, withdrawal symp- toms are more dangerous, severe, and long-lasting than in opiate withdrawal. A patient going through barbiturate withdrawal becomes anxious and apprehensive and manifests coarse tremors of the hands and face; additional symptoms commonly include insomnia, weakness, nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, rapid heart rate, elevated blood pressure, and loss of weight. An acute delirious psychosis may develop. For persons accustomed to taking large dosages, withdrawal symptoms may last for as long as a month, but usually they tend to abate by the end of the first week. Fortunately, the withdrawal symptoms in barbiturate addiction can be minimized by adminis- tering increasingly smaller doses of the barbiturate itself or another drug that produces similar effects. The withdrawal program is still a dangerous one, however, especially if barbiturate addiction is complicated by alcoholism or dependence on other drugs.  hallucinogens: lSD and Related Drugs  The   hallucinogens   are drugs that are thought to induce hal- lucinations. However, these preparations usually do not in fact “create” sensory images but distort them so that an individual sees or hears things in different and unusual ways. These drugs are often referred to as psychedelics. The major drugs in this cat- egory are LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) or “acid,” mescaline, and psilocybin.  lSD   The most potent of the hallucinogens, the odorless, color- less, and tasteless drug   LSD   can produce intoxication with an amount smaller than a grain of salt. It is a chemically synthesized substance first discovered by the Swiss chemist Albert Hoffman in 1938. Hoffman was not aware of the potent hallucinatory qualities of LSD until he swallowed a small amount. This is his report of the experience:  Last Friday, April 16, 1943, I was forced to stop my work in the laboratory in the middle of the afternoon and to go home, as I was seized by a peculiar restlessness associated with a sensation of mild dizziness. On arriving home, I lay down and sank into a kind of drunkenness which was not unpleasant and which was characterized by extreme activity of imagination. As I lay in a dazed condition with my eyes closed (I experienced daylight as disagreeably bright) there surged upon me an uninterrupted stream of fantastic images of extraordinary plasticity and vivid- ness and accompanied by an intense kaleidoscope-like play of colors. This condition gradually passed off after about 2 hours. (Hoffman, 1971, p. 23)  Hoffman followed up this experience with a series of planned self-observations with LSD, some of which he described as “harrowing.” Researchers thought LSD might be useful for the induction and study of hallucinogenic states or “model psychoses,” which were thought to be related to schizophrenia. About 1950, LSD was introduced into the United States for purposes of such research and to ascertain whether it might have medical or therapeutic uses. Despite considerable research, how- ever, LSD did not prove to be therapeutically useful. After taking LSD, a person typically goes through about 8 hours of changes in sensory perception, mood swings, and feel- ings of depersonalization and detachment. The LSD experience is not always pleasant. It can be extremely traumatic, and the distorted objects and sounds, the illusory colors, and the new thoughts can be menacing and terrifying. For example, while under the influence of LSD, a British law student tried to con- tinue time by using a dental drill to bore a hole in his head (Rorvik, 1970). In other instances, people undergoing bad trips have set themselves aflame, jumped from high places, and taken other drugs that proved lethal in combination with LSD. An interesting and unusual phenomenon that may occur sometime following the use of LSD is the   flashback , an involun- tary recurrence of perceptual distortions or hallucinations weeks or even months after the individual has taken the drug. Flashbacks appear to be relatively rare among people who have taken LSD only once—although they do sometimes occur. Even if no flashbacks occur, one study found that continued effects on visual function were apparent at least 2 years after LSD use. In this study, Abraham and Wolf (1988) report that individuals who had used LSD for a week had reduced visual sensitivity to light during dark adaptation and showed other visual problems compared with controls. Although the widespread use of LSD during the 1960s and 1970s has waned in recent years with the availability of other drugs, it is still used among young people associated with the “rave culture” or club scene. One recent study reported that in a sample of 782 youths in treatment for substance abuse, 42 per- cent had used LSD (Hopfer et al., 2006).
MESCAlinE AnD PSiloCyBin   Two other hallucinogens are  mescaline , which is derived from the small, disc-like growths (mescal buttons) at the top of the peyote cactus, and   psilocybin , which is obtained from a variety of “sacred” Mexican mushrooms known as   Psilocybe mexicana . These drugs have been used for cen- turies in the ceremonial rites of Native peoples living in Mexico, the American Southwest, and Central and South America. In fact, they were used by the Aztecs for such purposes long before the Spanish invasion. Both drugs have mind-altering and hallucino- genic properties, but their principal effect appears to be enabling an individual to see, hear, and otherwise experience events in un- accustomed ways—transporting him or her into a realm of “non- ordinary reality.” As with LSD, no definite evidence shows that mescaline and psilocybin actually “expand consciousness” or create new ideas; rather, they mainly alter or distort experience.  Ecstasy  The drug   Ecstasy , or MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxymethylam- phetamine), is both a hallucinogen and a stimulant that is popu- lar as a party drug among young adults. The drug was originally patented in 1914 by the pharmaceutical company Merck, sup- posedly to be sold as a diet pill, but the company decided against marketing the drug because of its side effects. The drug was fur- ther evaluated and tested during the 1970s and 1980s as a poten- tial medication for use in psychological treatment for a wide range of conditions such as posttraumatic stress, phobias, psy- chosomatic disorders, depression, suicidality, drug addiction, and relationship difficulties (Grob, 2000). However, its value in this capacity was not supported. At present, this drug is considered a “dangerous” drug and is listed in the most restricted category by the Drug Enforcement Administration (Murray, 2001). It is cur- rently available in the United States only through illicit means. Ecstasy is chemically similar to methamphetamine and to the hallucinogen mescaline and produces effects similar to those of other stimulants, although some research has suggested that the drug’s hallucinogenic properties exceed those of mescaline (Kovar, 1998; Parrott & Stuart, 1997). Usually about 20 minutes after ingesting Ecstasy (typically in pill form), the person experiences a “rush” sensation followed by a feeling of calmness, energy, and well- being. The effects of Ecstasy can last for several hours. People who take the drug often report an intense experience of color and sound and mild hallucinations (Fox et al., 2001; Lieb et al., 2002; Soar et al., 2001) in addition to the high levels of energy and excitement that are produced. The drug MDMA is an addictive substance, but it is not thought to be as addictive as cocaine (Degenhardt et al., 2010). Use of the drug is accompanied by a number of adverse consequences such as nausea, sweating, clenching of teeth, muscle cramps, blurred vision, and hallucinations (Parrott, 2001). Ecstasy has been used increasingly among college students and young adults as a party enhancement or “rave” drug at dances (Hopfer et al., 2006). In a survey of 14,000 college stu- dents, Strote and colleagues (2002) found that between 1997 and 1999, Ecstasy use increased 69 percent, from 2.8 percent to 4.7 percent. Ecstasy reportedly grew in use among 8th, 10th, and 12th graders, as noted by the Monitoring the Future study, in which nearly 5 percent of 10th and 12th graders and about 2 percent of 8th graders reportedly had used MDMA in the past year. In a recent survey of Americans over the age of 12, .02 percent of the sample reported using Ecstasy (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2009). As with many other illicit drugs, the recreational use of Ecstasy has been associated with personality characteristics of impulsivity and poor judgment (Morgan, 1998). Ecstasy users have been found to be more likely to use marijuana, engage in binge drinking, smoke cigarettes, and have multiple sexual partners (Strote et al., 2002). However, Ecstasy use is also found among naïve partygoers who are provided the drug as a means of staying awake while socializing (Boys et al., 2001). The negative psychological and health consequences (including death) of using Ecstasy have been widely reported in the literature. One study reported on the case of a 21-year- old man who developed panic disorder after taking Ecstasy (Windhaber et al., 1998); in another case study, an 18-year- old woman reportedly developed a prolonged psychosis after a single recreational use of Ecstasy (Van Kampen & Katz, 2001). The use of Ecstasy has also been found to be associated with memory impairment (Parrott et al., 1998) and obstructive sleep apnea (Chamberlin & Saper, 2009; McCann et al. 2009). Severe organic brain problems have also been reported. Granato and colleagues (1997) describe a case in which a 20-year-old male suffered from cerebrovascular injury after taking Ecstasy. The youth went into a coma about a minute or so after taking the drug. Upon awakening, he was found to have dissociation, delirium, visual hallucinations, and poor memory for past events. Subsequent examination showed damage to his frontal lobes and his right temporal lobe. Ecstasy users have consistently shown memory deficits (Roberts et al., 2009). A recent study by Schilt and colleagues (2010) found long-term harmful neurological  The Ecstasy drug (MDMA—3,4-methylenedioxymethylamphetamine) is taken in pill form and is often used at “raves” or nightclubs to enhance mood. Ecstasy is an illegal substance, and manufacturers do not follow regulation and quality control.
effects in middle-aged Ecstasy users. Moderate to heavy Ecstasy users showed moderate memory loss compared to controls.  Marijuana  Marijuana   comes from the leaves and flowering tops of the hemp plant,   Cannabis sativa , which grows in mild climates throughout the world. In its prepared state, marijuana consists chiefly of dried green leaves—hence the colloquial name grass. It is ordinar- ily smoked in the form of cigarettes (variously referred to as “pot,” “reefers,” “joints,” “stash,” “weed,” etc.) or in pipes. In some cul- tures the leaves are steeped in hot water and the liquid is drunk, much as one might drink tea. Marijuana is related to a stronger drug,   hashish , which is derived from the resin exuded by the can- nabis plant and made into a gummy powder. Hashish, like mari- juana, is usually smoked. Although marijuana can be considered a mild hallucinogen, there are significant differences between the nature, intensity, and duration of its effects and those induced by drugs like LSD, mescaline, and other major hallucinogens. Both marijuana use and hashish use can be traced far back into history. Cannabis was apparently known in ancient China (Blum, 1969) and was listed in the herbal compendiums of the Chinese Emperor Shen Nung, written about 2737 b.c. Until the late 1960s, marijuana use in the United States was confined largely to members of lower-socioeconomic-status and minority groups and to people in entertainment and related fields, but marijuana use is common- place today. Now marijuana is the most frequently used illicit drug. In 2008, 6.7 percent of the U. S. population between 12 and 17 years of age used marijuana; 16.5 percent of young adults did as well (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2009), although according to the most recent Monitoring the Future study, college students have begun to show some decline in marijuana use in recent years (Johnston et al., 2009). Minority group members and Caucasians have been shown to have comparable rates of use (Brown et al., 2004), however, one recent survey found that Hispanic American adults had lower rates of current illicit drug use (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2010). Cannabis is the most commonly used drug by people with schizophrenia (Coulston et al., 2007). Marijuana use is likely to show an increase in the future, given that it has been legalized in some states even though it is illegal according to U.S. legal standards. In a recent survey of drug-related visits to the emergency room (DAWN, 2010), 16 percent were for marijuana abuse. Many of these emergency room visits, as one might suspect, involved the use of other substances along with marijuana.  EffECTS of MARijUAnA   The specific effects of marijuana vary greatly, depending on the quality and dosage of the drug, the per- sonality and mood of the user, the user’s past experiences with the drug, the social setting, and the user’s expectations. However, con- siderable consensus exists among regular users that when marijuana is smoked and inhaled, a state of slight intoxication results. This state is one of mild euphoria distinguished by increased feelings of well-being, heightened perceptual acuity, and pleasant relaxation, often accompanied by a sensation of drifting or floating away. Sen- sory inputs are intensified. Marijuana has the effect on the brain of altering one’s internal clock (O’Leary et al., 2003). Often a person’s sense of time is stretched or distorted so that an event that lasts only a few seconds may seem to cover a much longer span. Short-term memory may also be affected, as when one notices that a bite has been taken out of a sandwich but does not remember having taken it. For most users, pleasurable experiences, including sexual inter- course, are reportedly enhanced. When smoked, marijuana is rap- idly absorbed, and its effects appear within seconds to minutes but seldom last more than 2 to 3 hours. Marijuana has also been used to relieve pain or nausea; see The World Around Us box on page 397 for a discussion of the controversy over medical marijuana.  TREATMEnT   Some research has reported that many marijuana users who abstain report having uncomfortable withdrawal-like symptoms such as nervousness, tension, sleep problems, and ap- petite change (Budney et al., 2003; Zickler, 2002). One study of substance abusers showed that marijuana users were more am- bivalent and less confident about stopping use than were cocaine abusers (Budney et al., 1998). Psychological treatment methods have been shown to be effective in reducing marijuana use in adults who are dependent on the drug (Marijuana Treatment Project Research Group, 2004). In a comparative review of psychological treatment stud- ies of marijuana users, Nordstrom and Levin (2007) conclude that a number of therapies have been found to be effective in treating cannabis dependency, but no specific treatment approach has been found to be more effective than the others. Some investigators have also reported that many patients do not show a positive treatment response. No pharmacotherapy treat- ment for cannabis dependency has been shown to be very effec- tive (Nordstrom and Levin, 2007); however, one recent study using busiprone for treatment of marijuana dependency showed slight improvement over a placebo group (McRae et al., 2009). As with other addictive drugs, there may be among the users many individuals with serious antisocial or “psychosis-prone”  Marijuana can produce extreme euphoria, hilarity, and hypertalkative- ness, but it can also produce intense anxiety and depression as well as delusions, hallucinations, and other psychotic-like behavior.
the WoRlD around us  Should Marijuana Be Marketed and Sold Openly as a Medication?  A lthough marijuana is a Schedule 1 Drug according to the 1970 Controlled Substances Act, and U. S. Government drug control agencies have strongly opposed legaliza- tion of the drug (Walters, 2006), there have been substantial efforts to broaden its use and availability. In recent years mari- juana has been distributed for pain or nausea relief from medical conditions such as cancer, AIDS, glaucoma, multiple sclerosis, migraines, and epilepsy. Proponents of medical marijuana cite its value in the treatment of these conditions, and some have pointed out that medical marijuana treatment is consistent with participation in other forms of drug treatment and may not ad- versely affect the outcome (Swartz, 2010). Marijuana does not cure any illness; it only reduces pain for which other medications exist (Watson, Benson et al., 2000). Proponents of medical marijuana have made considerable in- roads in securing legalization of marijuana as a treatment in 14 states and the District of Columbia. Although many professional researchers and practitioners discourage the use of marijuana because of the ill effects, others, including mental health profes- sionals, politicians, and lay persons, press society to change the rigid control over the drug and make it legal. States vary in how medical marijuana is made available to the public. Some locations, such as the District of Columbia, have ap- proved medical marijuana use by a limited and controlled number of dispensaries (Southall, 2010) while others have allowed a broad and less controlled environment to develop. A recent article by Vick (2009) pointed out that California’s medical marijuana law (Proposition 215) enabled the opening of more than 400 public dispensaries of medical marijuana in the Los Angeles area and re- sulted in marijuana becoming “mainstream.” The ready access to marijuana heightened concerns over the drug serving as an “entry level” drug for more addictive and dangerous illicit substances. This problem has been a focus of the U.S. government’s oppo- sition to legalizing marijuana since it has become more widely available (Walters, 2006). In 2012, the Los Angeles City Council rescinded its early approval of the sale of medical marijuana and closed down the numerous “clinics” that provided open access to the drug (Zahniser, 2012). It is uncertain as to what the future access to medical marijuana will be as various states may change their positions on marijuana use and availability. A number of problems with the use of medical marijuana have been reported, in part because of the unregulated availability of the drug; for example, one can get a “prescription” for the drug by walking into one of the many “treatment centers” and talking with a salesperson. A recent article by Moore (2009) describes the sentencing of an owner of a marijuana dispensary to a year in prison for distributing marijuana. Thus, providers of medical mari- juana to the public can still face the possibility of jail time in some situations. Yardley (2010) recently pointed out a number of crimes that resulted from the medical marijuana users having had large amounts of marijuana in their homes. Mascia (2010) highlighted another problem in using medical marijuana in employment set- tings. A number of people have lost jobs or have not been of- fered a position as a result of drug screening—a requirement for employment in many positions such as security personnel, police applicants, pilots, and even some corporations such as Walmart. Iversen (2008) makes a strong case for the research supporting the use of medical marijuana, but others continue to question the scientific basis of the medical use (Walters, 2006). Others have also pointed out that medical use of cannabis has been shown to be significantly associated with nonmedical use and could result in adverse consequences (Parakh, 2010). Should “medical marijuana” be considered a legitimate pharma- ceutical treatment? Is marijuana an effective drug based on the research, or is it without any medical value? Is marijuana being unfairly criminalized by the federal government, or does its po- tential as an entry drug and its medical side effects counter its value as a treatment? Should cannabis be approved for medical use by a vote of the people, as already has been done in many states, or should medical marijuana be scientifically evaluated and its use be guided by science? The controversy is likely to continue as more states vote to legalize medical marijuana and as other problems with the broadened availability of the drug emerge. Marijuana may lead to unpleasant as well as pleasant experiences. For example, if a person uses the drug while in an unhappy, an- gry, suspicious and paranoid, or frightened mood, these feelings may be magnified. With higher dosages and with certain unstable or susceptible individuals, marijuana can produce extreme eupho- ria, hilarity, and overtalkativeness, but it can also produce intense anxiety (Zvolensky et al., 2010) and depression as well as delu- sions, hallucinations, and other psychotic-like experiences. Evi- dence suggests a strong relationship between daily marijuana use and the occurrence of psychotic symptoms (Raphael et al., 2005). Marijuana’s short-range physiological effects include a moderate in- crease in heart rate, a slowing of reaction time, a slight contraction of pupil size, bloodshot and itchy eyes, a dry mouth, and increased appetite. Furthermore, marijuana induces memory dysfunction and a slowing of information processing (Pope et al., 2001). Continued use of high dosages over time tends to produce lethargy and pas- sivity along with reduced life success (Lane et al., 2005). In such cases marijuana appears to have a depressant and a hallucinogenic effect. The effects of long-term and habitual marijuana use are still under investigation, although a number of possible adverse side ef- fects have been found to be related to the prolonged, heavy use of marijuana (Earleywine, 2002). For example, marijuana use tends to diminish self-control. One study exploring past substance-use his- tory in incarcerated murderers reported that among men who had committed murder, marijuana was the most commonly used drug. One-third indicated that they had used the drug before the homi- cide, and two-thirds were experiencing some effects of the drug at the time of the murder (Spunt et al., 1994).
personalities (Kwapil, 1996). Treatment of marijuana use is hampered by the fact that there might be an underlying per- sonality disorder. One study compared the effectiveness of two treatments, Relapse Prevention and Support Group, with marijuana-dependent adults (Stephens et al., 1994). Both treat- ment conditions resulted in substantial reduction in marijuana use in the 12 months following treatment. Relapse Prevention and Support Group discussion sessions were equally effective in bringing about changes in marijuana use.  SynThETiC MARijUAnA   Not all discoveries or product de- velopments today are innovations that contribute to the public good. An example of a recent chemical that is widely marketed and can result in harm for the consumers is a marijuana sub- stitute that goes under the name of “Spice.” Spice is an herbal compound that is touted as an incense blend (as are several other chemical brands such as “K2,” “Blaze,” and “Red X Dawn”) and marketed on the Internet and in specialty shops. These products are advertised as a legal alternative to controlled substances such as marijuana. Spice is typically smoked along with tobacco; how- ever, it tends to take longer to feel the effects than marijuana. Many people who use Spice report that it has effects equal to or stronger than those obtained by smoking cannabis. Very little is known at this point about the make-up of Spice or its long-term effects. Reports suggest that it may contain up to 15 different herbs, of which wild dagga ( Leonotis leonurus ) and Indian warrior ( Pedicularis densiflora ) are considered to be the most likely candidates for producing a psychoactive effect. In addition, other synthetic chemicals may have been added to the drug (Griffiths et al., 2010). Although there is a limited amount of research and clinical information about synthetic marijuana, there are reports that the   toxicity   lasts 3 to 4 hours and often has adverse effects such as anxiety, tachycardia, hyperten- sion, abnormally fast breathing, chest pain, heart palpitations, hallucinations, racing thoughts, and seizures (Wells & Ott, 2011). Spice has come under the attention of drug control agencies because of the extreme and damaging side effects. A number of efforts are being made to place legal restrictions on its use and avail- ability (McLachlan, 2009). In November 2010, the United States Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) used its emergency scheduling authority to temporarily control five chemicals that are used to make fake marijuana products. In March of 2011, the DEA declared these chemicals to be illegal substances (Kraft, 2011).  Stimulants: Caffeine and nicotine  DSM-5   includes addictions to two legally available and widely used substances:   caffeine   and   nicotine . Although these sub- stances do not involve the extensive and self-destructive prob- lems found in alcohol- and drug-use disorders, they can create important physical and mental health problems in our society for several reasons:  • These drugs are easy to abuse. It is easy to become addicted  to them because they are widely used and most people are exposed to them early in life.  • These drugs are readily available to anyone who wants to use  them; in fact, because of peer pressure, it is usually difficult to avoid using them in our society.  • Both caffeine and nicotine have clearly addictive properties;  use of them promotes further use, until one craves a regular “fix” in one’s daily life.  • It is difficult to quit using these drugs both because of their  addictive properties and because they are so embedded in the social context. (Nicotine use, however, is falling out of favor in many settings.)  • The extreme difficulty most people have in dealing with the  withdrawal symptoms when trying to “break the habit” often produces considerable frustration.  • The health problems and side effects of these drugs, particu - larly nicotine, have been widely noted (USDHHS, 1994). One in seven deaths in the United States is associated with cigarette consumption. Because of their tenacity as habits and their contributions to many major health problems, we will examine each of these addictions in more detail.  CAffEinE   The chemical compound caffeine is found in many commonly available drinks and foods. Although the consumption of caffeine is widely practiced and socially promoted in contem- porary society, problems can result from excessive caffeine intake. The negative effects of caffeine involve intoxication rather than withdrawal. Unlike addiction to drugs such as alcohol or nicotine, withdrawal from caffeine does not produce severe symptoms, ex- cept for headache, which is usually mild.  Bath salts are becoming a widely used and dangerous stimulant drug and are now considered an illegal substance even though they are often available in bath products or fertilizers. The drug’s effects are very similar to ecstasy or cocaine. Bath salts contain amphetamine or cocaine-like chemicals, such as methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MPDV). They tend to cause intense euphoria and make the user very talkative and sexually aroused and often produce bizarre results.
As described in   DSM-5   caffeine-related disorder involves symptoms of restlessness, nervousness, excitement, insomnia, muscle twitching, and gastrointestinal complaints. It follows the ingestion of caffeine-containing substances such as coffee, tea, cola, and chocolate. The amount of caffeine that results in intoxication differs among individuals.  NicotiNe   The poisonous alkaloid nicotine is the chief active ingredient in tobacco; it is found in such items as cigarettes, chewing tobacco, and cigars, and it is even used as an insecti- cide. The use of tobacco is a significant problem in the general population. The number of Americans aged 12 and older who use some form of tobacco is estimated at 70.9 million people, or about 28.4 percent of the population (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2009). However, an es- timated 63 percent of women and 53 percent of men have never smoked (Pleis et al., 2009). The DSM-5 contains a diagnostic category for nicotine abuse. The criteria for tobacco use disorder are the same for other addictive disorders. Strong evidence exists for a nicotine-dependence syndrome (Malin, 2001; Watkins et al., 2000), which nearly always begins during the adolescent years and may continue into adult life as a difficult-to-break and health-endangering habit. Support- ing the finding that nicotine may have an antianxiety property, nicotine use has been observed as being highly prevalent among those with anxiety disorders (Morissette et al., 2007). Recent evidence from stroke-related brain injury suggests that nicotine addiction might be controlled by a portion of the brain near the ear called the insula (Naqvi et al., 2007). A stroke patient with damage to that area of the brain reported that his craving for cigarettes vanished. This result suggests that the insula might be an important center for addiction to smoking, but more research is needed to support this conclusion. The “Tobacco Withdrawal disorder,” as it is called in  DSM-5 , results from ceasing or reducing the intake of nicotine- containing substances after an individual has developed physical dependence on them. The diagnostic criteria for nicotine with- drawal include (1) the daily use of nicotine for at least several weeks, and (2) the following symptoms after nicotine ingestion is stopped or reduced: craving for nicotine; irritability, frustration, or anger; anxiety; difficulty concentrating; restlessness; decreased heart rate; and increased appetite or weight gain. Several other physical concomitants are associated with withdrawal from nico- tine including decreased metabolic rate, headaches, insomnia, tremors, increased coughing, and impairment of performance on tasks requiring attention. These withdrawal symptoms usually continue for several days to several weeks, depending on the extent of the nicotine habit. Some individuals report a desire for nicotine continuing for several months after they quit smoking. In general, nicotine withdrawal symptoms operate in a manner similar to those of withdrawal from other addictions—they are time limited and are reduced over time as the drug intake stops, (Hughes, 2007).  treatmeNt of NicotiNe WithdraWal   Over the past three decades, numerous treatment programs have been devel- oped to help smokers quit (Hughes, 2007). Available programs use many different methods including social support groups; various pharmacologic agents that replace cigarette consump- tion with safer forms of nicotine such as candy, gum, or patches; self-directed change that involves giving individuals guidance in changing their own behaviors; and professional treatment using psychological procedures such as behavioral or cognitive- behavioral interventions. One recent study provided smokers with ultrasound photographs of their carotid and femoral arteries along with quit-smoking counseling. This group showed higher quit rates than controls (Bovet et al., 2002). In general, tobacco dependence can be successfully treated, and most of the quit-smoking programs enjoy some success. They average only about a 20- to 25-percent success rate, however, although rates have been reported to be higher with treatment (Hays et al., 2001). This same level of suc- cess appears to result from the use of nicotine replacement therapy (NRT). Shiffman and colleagues (2006) point out that high-dose NRT reduces withdrawal symptoms. Treat- ment with active patches reduced withdrawal and craving dur- ing cessation and completely eliminated deprivation-related changes in affect or concentration. Recently, encouraging results have been reported on the use of the drug bupropion (Zyban) in preventing relapse for smokers trying to quit. The  Because they are socially acceptable and readily available, caffeine and nicotine can be insidiously addictive substances. Though they do not result in the same kind of extensive, self-destructive problems as alcohol and drug disorders, caffeine and nicotine addiction can cause a myriad of health problems and are now included in the   DSM-5 .
drug reduced relapse as long as the person was taking it, but relapse rates were similar to those of other treatments once the drug was discontinued (Barringer & Weaver, 2002). The highest self-reported quit rates for smokers were reportedly among patients who were hospitalized for cancer (63 percent), cardiovascular disease (57 percent), or pulmonary disease (46 percent; Smith, Reilly, et al., 2002). Not all addictive disorders involve the use of substances with chemical properties that induce dependence. As discussed in the next section, people can develop “addictions” to certain activities that can be just as life-threatening as severe alcoholism and just as damaging, psychologically and socially, as drug abuse. One such addiction,  pathological gambling , is in many ways similar to substance abuse. The maladaptive behaviors involved and the treatment approaches shown to be effective suggest that these addictive disorders are quite similar to the various drug-use and drug-induced disorders.  in review  •   What are the major biological and psychological effects of using opiates such as morphine and heroin?  •   What are the three major causal factors in the development of opiate abuse and dependence?  •   What is methamphetamine? What are the major health factors related to methamphetamine use?  •   What are the physical risks of taking Ecstasy?  •   Describe the effects of cannabis.  •   Describe the effects of nicotine and caffeine use, and explain why these commonly available substances are included in this chapter on substance abuse.  Gambling Disorder  Although pathological gambling does not involve a chemically addictive substance, it is considered by many to be an addictive disorder because of the personality factors that tend to character- ize compulsive gamblers (Petry & Madden, 2010). Like the sub- stance abuse disorders, pathological gambling involves behavior maintained by short-term gains despite long-term disruption of an individual’s life. There is a high comorbidity between patho- logical gambling and alcohol abuse disorders (Blanco, Cohen et al., 2010) and with personality disorders (Sacco et al., 2008). Pathological gambling, also known as “compulsive gambling” or disordered gambling, is a progressive disorder characterized by continuous or periodic loss of control over gambling, a preoccu- pation with gambling and with obtaining money for gambling, and continuation of the gambling behavior in spite of adverse consequences. Estimates place the number of pathological gamblers world- wide at between 1 and 2 percent of the adult population (Petry, 2005). Both men and women appear to be vulnerable to patho- logical gambling (Hing & Breen, 2001). However, rates differ by subpopulation; for example, in some high-risk populations, such as alcoholics, the rates are higher. One study of elderly Afri- can Americans from two senior citizen centers documented the extent of gambling problems in this population; 17 percent were found to be people with gambling disorders (Bazargan et al., 2001). Pietrzak and colleagues (2007) found that older, disor- dered gamblers were significantly more likely than nongambling older adults to have alcohol-abuse problems, nicotine addiction, and health problems.  DSM- 5  criteria for  Gambling Disorder  a.   Persistent and recurrent problematic gambling behavior lead- ing to clinically significant impairment or distress, as indicated by the individual exhibiting four (or more) of the following in a 12-month period:  1.   Needs to gamble with increasing amounts of money in order to achieve the desired excitement.  2.   Is restless or irritable when attempting to cut down or stop gambling.  3.   Has made repeated unsuccessful efforts to control, cut back, or stop gambling.  4.   Is often preoccupied with gambling (e.g., having per- sistent thoughts of reliving past gambling experiences, handicapping or planning the next venture, thinking of ways to get money with which to gamble).  5.   Often gambles when feeling distressed (e.g., helpless, guilty, anxious, depressed).  6.   After losing money gambling, often returns another day to get even (“chasing” one’s losses).  7.   Lies to conceal the extent of involvement with gambling.  8.   Has jeopardized or lost a significant relationship, job, or educational or career opportunity because of gambling.  9.   Relies on others to provide money to relieve desperate financial situations caused by gambling.  B.   The gambling behavior is not better explained by a manic episode.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Fifth Edition, (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association.
Cultural factors also appear to be important in the develop- ment of gambling problems. Pathological gambling is a particu- lar problem among Southeast Asian refugees, especially those from Laos. Surveys of mental health problems have reported almost epidemic compulsive gambling among such groups (Aronoff, 1987; Ganju & Quan, 1987). Gambling in our society takes many forms including casino gambling, betting on horse races or sports (legally or otherwise), Internet gaming, numbers games, lotteries, dice, bingo, and cards. Whatever an individual gambler’s situation, compulsive gambling significantly affects the social, psychological, and eco- nomic well-being of the gambler’s family. In fact, studies have found that a high proportion of pathological gamblers commit crimes that are related to gambling (Blaszczynski et al., 1989), family violence (Afifi et al., 2010) and other crimes of aggression (Folino & Abait, 2009). Pathological gambling seems to be a learned pattern that is highly resistant to extinction. Some research suggests that control over gambling is related to duration and frequency of playing (Scannell et al., 2000). However, many people who become pathological gamblers won a substantial sum of money the first time they gambled; chance alone would dictate that a certain percentage of people would have such “beginner’s luck.” The reinforcement a person receives during this introductory phase may be a significant factor in later pathological gambling. Because everyone is likely to win from time to time, the prin- ciples of intermittent reinforcement—the most potent rein- forcement schedule for operant conditioning—could explain an addict’s continued gambling despite excessive losses. Despite their awareness that the odds are against them, and despite the fact that they rarely or never repeat their early suc- cess, compulsive gamblers continue to gamble avidly. To “stake” their gambling, they often dissipate their savings, neglect their families, default on bills, and borrow money from friends and loan companies. Some resort to embezzlement, writing bad checks, or other illegal means of obtaining money. In a pioneer- ing study of former pathological gamblers, Rosten (1961) found that they tended to be rebellious, unconventional individuals who did not seem to understand fully the ethical norms of soci- ety. Half of the group described themselves as “hating regula- tions.” Often they had the unshakable feeling that “tonight is my night.” Typically, they had also followed the so-called “Monte Carlo fallacy”—that after so many losses, their turn was com- ing up and they would hit it big. Many of the men discussed the extent to which they had “fooled themselves” by elaborate rationalizations. Later studies also describe pathological gamblers as typi- cally immature, rebellious, thrill-seeking, superstitious, basically antisocial, and compulsive (Hollander et al, 2000). Research has shown that pathological gambling frequently co-occurs with other disorders, particularly substance abuse such as alcohol and cocaine dependence (Kausch, 2003; Welte et al., 2004) and impulse disorders (Grant & Potenza, 2010). Those with co-occurring substance-abuse disorders typically have the most severe gambling problems (Ladd & Petry, 2003). The causes of impulse-driven behavior in pathological gambling are complex. Some research has suggested that early trauma might contribute to the development of compulsive gambling (Scherrer et al., 2007). Although learning undoubt- edly plays an important part in the development of personality factors underlying the “compulsive” gambler, recent research in brain mechanisms that are involved in motivation, reward, and decision making indicates that these mechanisms could influence the underlying impulsivity in personality (Chambers & Potenza, 2003). These investigators have suggested that important neuro- developmental events during adolescence occur in brain regions associated with motivation and impulsive behavior. Recent research has also suggested that genetic factors might play a part in developing pathological gambling habits (Slutske et al., 2010). Treatment of pathological gamblers has tended to parallel that of other addictive disorders. The most extensive treatment approach used with pathological gamblers is cognitive-behavioral therapy (Okuda et al., 2009). For example, Sylvain, Ladouceur, and Boisvert (1997) provided cognitive-behavioral therapy for 58 pathological gamblers recruited through the media. Although 18 participants dropped out at the start and 11 quit during therapy, those who remained in treatment showed significant improvement. Of those who completed therapy, 86 percent were considered “no longer” pathological gamblers at a 1-year follow-up. However, one study (Hodgins & el-Guebaly, 2004) reports very high relapse rates among pathological gamblers—only 8 percent were free of gambling 12 months after treatment. Even studies that show improvement during treatment also report participants’ dif- ficulty remaining abstinent. In a study of 231 gamblers (Petry et al., 2006), some improved when receiving cognitive-behavioral therapy and when attending at Gambler’s Anonymous (GA), an organiza- tion modeled after Alcoholics Anonymous, or when attending GA and receiving a workbook. The patients tended not to remain absti- nent, although incidents were less than they usually reported. Most participants reported some gambling during the follow-up period. More positive outcomes in treating pathological gambling have been found when family relationship problems are addressed in the treatment (McComb et al., 2009). Pathological gambling is on the increase in the United States (Potenza, 2002), particularly with the widely available gambling opportunities on the Internet (Griffiths, 2003). Liberalized gambling legislation has permitted state-operated lotteries, horse racing, and gambling casinos in an effort to increase state tax revenues. In the context of this apparent environmental support and “official” sanction for gambling, it is likely that pathological gambling will increase substantially as more and more people “try their luck.” Given that pathological gamblers are resistant to treatment, future efforts to develop more effective preventive and treatment approaches will need to be increased as this problem continues to grow.   Watch   the   Video   Ed: Gambling Disorder   on  MyPsychLab
UnResolveD issues  Exchanging Addictions: Is This an Effective Treatment Approach?  W ithdrawal from heroin can be extremely difficult be- cause of the intense craving that develops for the drug. Wouldn’t it be great if we had a magic bullet—a medication—that would allow people who are addicted to her- oin to withdraw from it painlessly? One approach that has been used for several decades involves the administration of metha- done (methadone hydrochloride, a synthetic narcotic that is as addictive as heroin), often in conjunction with a psychological or social rehabilitation program that is aimed at resocialization of the abuser. The value of this treatment comes from the fact that methadone satisfies an addict’s craving for heroin without pro- ducing serious psychological impairment. Many researchers have concluded that in addition to facilitating psychological or social rehabilitation, this drug is effective at reducing the dependence on heroin (Kreek et al., 2010). Thus, it enables many people to experience reduced craving, allowing them to alter somewhat the often desperate life circumstances they find themselves in through trying to support their expen- sive and all-consuming habit. In addition, opiate addicts who remain on methadone have a substantially lower death rate than those discharged from methadone maintenance programs (Fugelstad et al., 2007). The idea that addicts may need to be maintained for life on methadone, itself a powerful and addicting drug, has been questioned both on moral and practical grounds. Methadone advocates, however, point out that addicts on methadone can function normally and hold jobs, which is not possible for most heroin addicts. In addition, methadone is available legally, and its quality is controlled by government standards. Advocates for methadone programs point out that it is not necessary to increase the dosage over time as it is with heroin use. In fact, some patients can eventually stop taking methadone without danger of relapse to heroin addiction. However, negative consequences are sometimes associated with the use of methadone (Miller & Lyon, 2003). Methadone patients are at increased risk for health problems such as hepatitis (McCarthy & Flynn, 2001) and cognitive impairment (Scheurich, 2005; Verdejo et al., 2005). In addition, many social problems, such as trading sex for drugs, persist (El-Bassel et al., 2001); some addicts get involved with other drugs such as cocaine (Avants et al. 1998; Silverman et al., 1996); suicide attempts are common (Darke & Ross, 2001); and violent deaths and drug overdoses are common among methadone patients (Sunjic & Zabor, 1999). A great deal of research has shown that administering psycho- therapy along with methadone increases the effectiveness of treatment (Marsch et al., 2005). However, a persistent problem of methadone maintenance programs has been the relatively high dropout rate. Several variations in methadone maintenance programs have been aimed at keeping addicts in therapy. These variations include the use of such additional drugs as clonidine (an antihypertensive drug used to treat essential hypertension and prevent headache), which aid in the detoxification process and reduce the discomfort of withdrawal symptoms. In one study, the joint use of tranquilizers such as diazepam was shown to decrease the amount of methadone consumed (Spiga et al., 2001). Another approach involves the use of behavioral shaping through contingent reinforcers (monetary vouchers) to reward abstinent patients (Preston et al., 2001). A new approach to treating opiate dependence is one that pro- motes drug abstinence for addicts rather than permanent main- tenance on methadone (Kosten, 2003). This program, referred to as methadone transition treatment (MTT), involves several elements over its 180-day duration. During the first 100 days, the addict is provided a stable dose of methadone to begin the withdrawal from heroin. During this period the addict also receives a psychosocial intervention that includes weekly psy- choeducational classes, biweekly group therapy, and 6 months of individual therapy that continues after drug maintenance has terminated. The program ends with 80 days of phaseout in which the addict is “weaned” from methadone through system- atically decreasing the doses (Piotrowski et al., 1999).  11.1   what is alcohol abuse and dependence?  •   Substance-related disorders such as alcohol or drug abuse and dependency are among the most widespread and intransigent mental health problems facing us today.  •   Many problems of alcohol or drug use involve difficulties that stem solely from the intoxicating effects of the substances.  •   Dependence occurs when an individual develops a tolerance for the substance or exhibits withdrawal symptoms when the sub- stance is not available.  •   Several psychoses related to alcoholism have been identified: withdrawal delirium, chronic alcoholic hallucinosis, and demen- tia associated with alcoholism.  •   Drug-related abuse disorders may involve physiological depen- dence on substances such as opiates—particularly heroin—or  11   summary
key terms  addictive behavior   368  alcohol withdrawal delirium   374  alcoholic   369  alcoholism   369  amphetamine   391  barbiturates   393  caffeine   398  cocaine   390  delirium tremens   374  Ecstasy   395  endorphins   389  flashback   394  hallucinogens   394  hashish   396  heroin   387  lSD   394  marijuana   396  mescaline   395  mesocorticolimbic dopamine pathway (MClP)   375  methadone   390  morphine   387  nicotine   398  opium   387  pathological gambling   400  psilocybin   395  psychoactive substances   369  substance abuse   369  substance dependence   369  substance-related disorders   368  tolerance   369  toxicity   398  withdrawal   369 barbiturates; however, psychological dependence may also occur with any of the drugs that are commonly used today—for exam- ple, marijuana.  •   A number of factors are considered important in the etiology of substance-abuse disorders. Some substances, such as alcohol and opiates, stimulate brain centers that produce euphoria—which then becomes a desired goal.  •   It is widely believed that genetic factors play some role in causing susceptibility to alcohol-abuse problems through such biological avenues as metabolic rates and sensitivity to alcohol.  •   Psychological factors—such as psychological vulnerability, stress, and the desire for tension reduction—and disturbed marital rela- tionships or failure in parental guidance are also seen as impor- tant etiologic elements in substance-use disorders.  •   Although the existence of an “alcoholic personality type” has been disavowed by most theorists, a variety of personality fac- tors apparently play an important role in the development and expression of addictive disorders.  •   Sociocultural factors such as attitudes toward alcohol may predis- pose individuals to alcohol-related disorders.  11.2   what is drug abuse and dependence?  •   Possible causal factors in drug abuse include the influence of peer groups, the existence of a so-called “drug culture,” and the avail- ability of drugs as tension reducers or pain relievers.  •   Some recent research has explored a possible physiological basis for drug abuse. The discovery of endorphins, opium-like sub- stances produced by the body, has led to speculation that a bio- chemical basis of drug addiction may exist.  •   The so-called “pleasure pathway”—the mesocorticolimbic pathway (MCLP)—has come under a great deal of study in recent years as the possible potential anatomic site underlying the addictions.  •   The treatment of individuals who abuse alcohol or drugs is generally difficult and often fails. The abuse may reflect a long history of psychological difficulties; interpersonal and marital distress may be involved; and financial and legal problems may be present.  •   In addition, all such problems must be dealt with by an indi- vidual who may deny that the problems exist and who may not be motivated to work on them.  •   Several approaches to the treatment of chronic substance-related disorders have been developed—for example, medication to deal with withdrawal symptoms and withdrawal delirium, and dietary evaluation and treatment for malnutrition.  •   Psychological therapies such as group therapy and behav- ioral interventions may be effective with some alcohol- or drug-abusing individuals. Another source of help for alcohol abusers is Alcoholics Anonymous; however, the extent of suc- cessful outcomes w ith this program has not been sufficiently studied.  •   Most treatment programs require abstinence; however, some research has suggested that some alcohol abusers can learn to control their drinking while continuing to drink socially. The controversy surrounding controlled drinking continues.  •   Relapse prevention strategies have proved successful in helping substance-abusing patients to deal with the challenges encoun- tered in abstinence-based treatment approaches.  11.3   Are there addictive disorders other than alcohol and drugs?  •   This chapter also includes discussion of several addictive dis- orders that are different than alcohol or drug abuse, caffeine, tobacco and gambling.
learning objectives  12.1  Why is it difficult to define boundaries between normality and psychopathology in the area of variant sexuality?  12.2  What do we mean by sexual and gender variants?  12.3  What are the three primary types of sexual abuse?  12.4  What is a sexual dysfunction?  Loving, sexually satisfying relationships contribute a great deal to our happiness, and if we are not in such relationships, we are apt to spend a great deal of time, effort, and emotional energy look- ing for them. Sexuality is a central concern of our lives, influenc- ing with whom we fall in love and mate and how happy we are with our partner and with ourselves. In this chapter we shall first look at the psychological prob- lems that make sexual fulfillment especially difficult for some people—the vast majority of them men—who develop unusual sexual interests that are difficult to satisfy in a socially accept- able manner. For example, exhibitionists are sexually aroused by showing their genitals to strangers, who are likely to be dis- gusted, frightened, and potentially traumatized. Other sexual or gender variants may be problematic primarily to the individual: Transsexualism, for example, is a disorder involving discomfort with one’s biological sex and a strong desire to be of the opposite sex. Still other variants such as fetishism, in which sexual interest centers on some inanimate object or body part, involve behaviors that, although bizarre and unusual, do not clearly harm anyone. Perhaps no other area covered in this book exposes the difficul- ties in defining boundaries between normality and psychopathol- ogy as clearly as variant sexuality does. The second issue we shall consider is sexual abuse, a pattern of pressured, forced, or inappropriate sexual contact. During the last few decades, there has been a tremendous increase in atten- tion to the problem of sexual abuse of both children and adults. A great deal of research has addressed its causes and consequences. As we shall see, some related issues, such as the reality of recovered memories of sexual abuse, are extremely controversial. The third category of sexual difficulties examined in this chapter is sexual dysfunctions, which include problems that impede satisfactory performance of sexual acts. People who have sexual dysfunctions (or their partners) typically view them as problems. Premature ejaculation, for example, causes men to reach orgasm much earlier than they and their partners find sat- isfying. And women with orgasmic disorder get sexually aroused and enjoy sexual activity but have a persistent delay, or absence, of orgasm following a normal sexual excitement or   arousal phase . Much less is known about sexual deviations, abuse, and dysfunctions than is known about many of the other disorders we have considered thus far in this book. There are also fewer sex researchers than researchers for many other disorders, so fewer articles related to research on sexual deviations and dysfunctions are published compared with the number of articles on anxiety and mood disorders or schizophrenia. One major reason is the sex taboo. Although sex is an important concern for most people, many have difficulty talking about it openly—especially when the relevant behavior is socially stigmatized, as homosexuality has often been historically. This makes it hard to obtain knowledge about even the most basic facts, such as the frequency of various sexual practices, feelings, and attitudes. A second reason why sex research has progressed less rapidly is that many issues related to sexuality—including homosexual- ity, teenage sexuality, abortion, and childhood sexual abuse—are among our most divisive and controversial. In fact, sex research is itself controversial and not well funded. In the 1990s, two large- scale sex surveys were halted because of political opposition even after the surveys had been officially approved and deemed scien- tifically meritorious (Udry, 1993). Conservative former senator Jesse Helms and others had argued that sex researchers tended to approve of premarital sex and homosexuality and that this would likely bias the results of the surveys. Fortunately, one of these surveys was funded privately, though on a much smaller scale, and it is still considered definitive even though it was conducted in the 1990s (Laumann et al., 1994, 1999). Another attack led by social conservatives occurred in 2003, when several federal grants were criticized because they focused on sex (Kempner, 2008). A legislative attempt to defund five of the grants barely failed. Despite these significant barriers, significant progress has been made in the past half-century in understanding some important things about sexual and gender variants and dysfunc- tions. The contemporary era of sex research was first launched by Alfred Kinsey in the early 1950s (Kinsey et al., 1948, 1953). Kinsey and his pioneering work are portrayed in a fascinating way in the 2004 award-winning movie Kinsey. However, before we discuss this progress, we first examine sociocultural influences on sexual behavior and attitudes in general. We do so to provide some perspective about cross-cultural variability in standards of sexual conduct and how these perspectives have changed over  12
time. Such examples will remind us that we must exercise special caution in classifying sexual practices as “abnormal” or “deviant.”  Sociocultural Influences on Sexual Practices and Standards  Although some aspects of sexuality and mating, such as men’s greater emphasis on their partner’s attractiveness, are cross- culturally universal (Buss, 1989, 2012), others are quite variable. For example, all known cultures have taboos against sex between close relatives, but attitudes toward premarital sex have varied considerably across history and around the world. Ideas about acceptable sexual behavior also change over time. Less than 100 years ago, for example, sexual modesty in Western cultures was such that women’s arms and legs were always hidden in public. Although this is by no means the case in Western cultures today, it remains true in many Muslim countries. Despite the substantial variability in sexual attitudes and behavior in different times and places, people typically behave as though the sexual standards of their own time and place are obvi- ously correct, and they tend to be intolerant of sexual nonconfor- mity. Sexual nonconformists are often considered evil or sick. We do not mean to suggest that such judgments are always arbitrary. There has probably never existed a society in which Jeffrey Dah- mer, who was sexually aroused by killing men, having sex with them, storing their corpses, and sometimes eating them, would be considered psychologically normal. Nevertheless, it is useful to be aware of historical and cultural influences on sexuality. When the expression or the acceptance of a certain behavior varies consider- ably across eras and cultures, we should at least pause to consider the possibility that our own stance is not the only appropriate one. Because the influences of time and place are so important in shaping sexual behavior and attitudes, we begin by exploring three cases that illustrate how opinions about “acceptable” and “normal” sexual behavior may change dramatically over time and may differ dramatically from one culture to another. In the first case, America during the mid-1800s, “degeneracy theory”—a set of beliefs about sexuality—led to highly conservative sexual prac- tices and dire warnings about most kinds of sexual “indulgence.” In the second case, we look briefly at the Sambia tribe in New Guinea, in which a set of beliefs about sexuality prescribe that all normal adolescent males go through a stage of homosexuality before switching rather abruptly to heterosexuality in adulthood. Finally, in the third case, we consider changes across time in the status of homosexuality in Western culture.  Case 1: Degeneracy and Abstinence Theory  During the 1750s, Swiss physician Simon Tissot developed  degeneracy theory , the central belief of which was that semen is necessary for physical and sexual vigor in men and for mascu- line characteristics such as beard growth (Money, 1985, 1986). He based this theory on observations about human eunuchs and castrated animals. We now know, of course, that loss of the male hormone testosterone, and not of semen, is responsible for the relevant characteristics of eunuchs and castrated animals. On the basis of his theory, however, Tissot asserted that two practices were especially harmful: masturbation and patronizing prostitutes. Both of these practices wasted the vital fluid, semen, as well as (in his view) overstimulating and exhausting the nervous system. Tissot also recommended that married people engage solely in procreative sex to avoid the waste of semen. A descendant of degeneracy theory, abstinence theory was advocated in America during the 1830s by the Reverend Sylves- ter Graham (Money, 1985, 1986). The three cornerstones of his crusade for public health were healthy food (graham crackers were named for him), physical fitness, and sexual abstinence. In the 1870s Graham’s most famous successor, Dr. John Harvey Kellogg, published a paper in which he ardently disapproved of masturbation and urged parents to be wary of signs that their children were indulging in it. He wrote about the 39 signs of “the secret vice,” which included weakness, dullness of the eyes, sleep- lessness, untrustworthiness, bashfulness, love of solitude, unnatu- ral boldness, mock piety, and round shoulders. As a physician, Kellogg was professionally admired and pub- licly influential, and he earned a fortune publishing books dis- couraging masturbation. His recommended treatments for “the secret vice” were quite extreme. For example, he advocated that persistent masturbation in boys be treated by sewing the foreskin with silver wire or, as a last resort, by circumcision without anes- thesia. Female masturbation was to be treated by burning the clitoris with carbolic acid. Kellogg, like Graham, was also very concerned with dietary health—especially with the idea that con- sumption of meat increased sexual desire. Thus, he urged people to eat more cereals and nuts and invented Kellogg’s cornflakes “almost literally, as anti-masturbation food” (1986, p. 186). Given the influence of physicians like Kellogg, it should come as no surprise that many people believed that  Loving, sexually satisfying relationships contribute a great deal to our happiness, but our understanding of them has advanced slowly, largely because they are so difficult for people to talk about openly and because funding for research is often hard to come by.
masturbation caused insanity (Hare, 1962). This hypothesis had started with the anonymous publication in the early eighteenth century in London of a book entitled Onania, or the Heinous Sin of Self-Pollution. It asserted that masturbation was a com- mon cause of insanity. This idea probably arose from observa- tions that many patients in mental asylums masturbated openly (unlike sane people, who are more likely to do it in private) and that the age at which masturbation tends to begin (at puberty in adolescence) precedes by several years the age when the first signs of insanity often appear (in late adolescence and young adulthood) (Abramson & Seligman, 1977). The idea that mas- turbation may cause insanity appeared in some psychiatry text- books as late as the 1940s. Although abstinence theory and associated attitudes seem highly puritanical by today’s standards, they have had a long- lasting influence on attitudes toward sex in American and other Western cultures. It was not until 1972 that the American Medical Association declared, “Masturbation is a normal part of adolescent sexual development and requires no medical manage- ment” (American Medical Association Committee on Human Sexuality, 1972, p. 40). Around the same time, the Boy Scout Manual dropped its antimasturbation warnings. Nonetheless, in 1994 Jocelyn Elders was fired as U.S. Surgeon General for sug- gesting publicly that sex education courses should include discus- sion of masturbation. Moreover, the Roman Catholic Church still holds that masturbation is sinful.  Case 2: Ritualized Homosexuality in Melanesia  Melanesia is a group of islands in the South Pacific that has been intensively studied by anthropologists, who have uncovered cultural influences on sexuality unlike any known in the West. Between 10 and 20 percent of Melanesian societies practice a form of homosex- uality within the context of male initiation rituals, which all male members of society must experience. The best-studied society has been the Sambia of Papua New Guinea (Herdt, 2000; Herdt & Stoller, 1990). Two beliefs reflected in Sambian sexual practices are semen conservation and female pollution. Like Tissot, the Sambians believe that semen is important for many things including physical growth, strength, and spirituality. Furthermore, they believe that it takes many inseminations (and much semen) to impregnate a woman. Finally, they believe that semen cannot easily be replenished by the body and so must be conserved or obtained elsewhere. The female pollution doctrine is the belief that the female body is unhealthy to males, primarily because of menstrual fluids. At menarche, Sambian women are secretly initiated in the men- strual hut forbidden to all males. In order to obtain or maintain adequate amounts of semen, young Sambian males practice semen exchange with each other. Beginning as boys, they learn to practice fellatio (oral sex) in order to ingest sperm, but after puberty they can also take the penetrative role, inseminating younger boys. Ritualized homo- sexuality among the young Sambian men is seen as an exchange of sexual pleasure for vital semen. (It is ironic that although both the Sambians and the Victorian-era Americans believed in semen conservation, their solutions to the problem were radically dif- ferent.) When Sambian males are well past puberty, they begin the transition to heterosexuality. At this time the female body is thought to be less dangerous because the males have ingested protective semen over the previous years. For a time, they may begin having sex with women and still participate in fellatio with younger boys, but homosexual behavior stops after the birth of a man’s first child. Most of the Sambian men make the transition to exclusive adult heterosexuality without problems, and those who do not are viewed as misfits. Ritualized homosexuality among the Melanesians is a striking example of the influence of culture on sexual attitudes and behavior. A Melanesian adolescent who refuses to prac- tice homosexuality would be viewed as abnormal, and such adolescents are apparently absent or rare. In the United States ritualized homosexuality of this type would be stigmatized as homosexual pedophilia, but Melanesian boys who practice it appear neither to have strong objections nor to be derailed from eventual heterosexuality. Obviously, homosexuality in Sambia is not the same as homosexuality in contemporary America, with the possible exception of those Sambian men who have difficulty making the transition to heterosexuality.  Case 3: Homosexuality and American Psychiatry  During the past half-century, the status of homosexuality has changed enormously, both within psychiatry and psychology and for many Western societies in general. In the not-too-distant past, homosexuality was a taboo topic. Now, movies, talk shows, and television sitcoms and dramas address the topic explicitly by includ- ing gay men and lesbians in leading roles. As we shall see, develop- ments in psychiatry and psychology have played an important part in these changes. Homosexuality was officially removed from the  DSM   (where it had previously been classified as a sexual deviation) in 1973 and today is no longer regarded as a mental disorder. A brief survey of attitudes toward homosexuality within the mental health profession itself will again illustrate how attitudes toward various expressions of human sexuality may change over time.  HoMosexuAliTy As siCkness   Reading the medical and psychological literature on homosexuality written before 1970 can be a jarring experience, especially if one subscribes to views prevalent today. Relevant articles included “Effeminate homosexuality: A disease of childhood” and “On the cure of homosexuality.” It is only fair to note, however, that the view that homosexual people are mentally ill was relatively tolerant compared with some earlier views—for example, the idea that homosexual people are criminals in need of incarceration (Bayer, 1981). British and American cultures had long taken punitive approaches to homosexual behavior. In the sixteenth century, King Henry VIII of England declared “the detestable and
abominable vice of buggery [anal sex]” a felony punishable by death, and it was not until 1861 that the maximum penalty was reduced to 10 years’ imprisonment. Similarly, laws in the United States were very repressive until recently, with homosexual behavior continuing to be a criminal offense in some states (Es- kridge, 2008) until the 2003 Supreme Court ruling that struck down a Texas state law banning sexual behavior between two people of the same sex ( Lawrence & Garner v. Texas ). For the first time, this ruling established a broad constitutional right to sexual privacy in the United States. During the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, several prominent sexologists such as Havelock Ellis and Magnus Hirschfeld suggested that homosexuality is natural and consistent with psychological normality. Freud’s own attitude toward homo- sexual people was also remarkably progressive for his time and is well expressed in his touching “Letter to an American Mother” (1935).  Dear Mrs. . . . I gather from your letter that your son is a homosexual. I am most impressed by the fact that you do not mention this term yourself in your information about him. May I question you, why you avoid it? Homosexuality is assuredly no advan- tage, but it is nothing to be ashamed of, no vice, no degrada- tion, it cannot be classified as an illness. . . . Many highly respectable individuals of ancient and modern times have been homosexuals, several of the greatest men among them (Plato, Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, etc.). It is a great injustice to persecute homosexuality as a crime, and cruelty too. . . . By asking me if I can help, you mean, I suppose, if I can abolish homosexuality and make normal heterosexuality take its place. The answer is, in a general way, we cannot promise to achieve it. . . . Sincerely yours with kind wishes, Freud  Beginning in the 1940s, however, other psychoanalysts, led by Sandor Rado, began to take a more pessimistic view of the mental health of homosexual people—and a more optimistic view of the possible success of therapy to induce heterosexuality (Herek, 2010). Rado (1962) believed that homosexuality develops in peo- ple whose heterosexual desires are too psychologically threatening; thus, in this view, homosexuality is an escape from heterosexuality and therefore incompatible with mental health (see also Bieber et al., 1962). In the case of male homosexuality, one argument was that domineering, emotionally smothering mothers and detached, hostile fathers played a causal role. Unfortunately, these psycho- analysts based their opinions primarily on their experiences seeing gay men in therapy, who are obviously more likely than other gay men to be psychologically troubled (Herek, 2010).  HoMosexuAliTy As nonPATHologiCAl VARiATion  Around 1950, the view of homosexuality as sickness began to be challenged by both scientists and homosexual people themselves (e.g., Herek, 2010). Scientific blows to the pathology position included Alfred Kinsey’s finding that homosexual behavior was more common than had been previously believed (Kinsey et al., 1948, 1953). Influential studies also demonstrated that trained psychologists could not distinguish the psychological test results of homosexual subjects from those of heterosexual subjects (e.g., Hooker, 1957). Gay men and lesbians also began to challenge the psychiatric orthodoxy that homosexuality is a mental disorder. The 1960s saw the birth of the radical gay liberation movement, which took the more uncompromising stance that “gay is good.” The decade closed with the famous Stonewall riot in New York City, sparked by police mistreatment of gay men, which sent a clear signal that homosexual people would no longer tolerate being treated as second-class citizens. By the 1970s, openly gay psychiatrists and psychologists were working from within the mental health pro- fession to have homosexuality removed from   DSM-II   (American Psychiatric Association, 1968). After acrimonious debate in 1973 and 1974, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) voted in 1974 by a vote of 5,854 to 3,810 to remove homosexuality from   DSM-II.   This episode was a milestone for gay rights. We believe the APA made a cor- rect decision here because the vast majority of evidence shows that homosexuality is compatible with psychological health (e.g., Herek, 2010). Challenges by gay and lesbian people forced men- tal health professionals to confront the issue explicitly, and these professionals made the correct determination that homosexuality is not a psychological disorder. After mental health professionals stopped merely assuming that homosexuality was pathological, research began systemati- cally to address mental health concerns of gay men and lesbians. Several large and careful surveys have examined rates of mental problems in people with and without homosexual feelings or behavior (Chakraborty et al., 2011; Sandfort et al., 2001; see Herek & Garnets, 2007, for a review). Homosexual people do appear to have elevated risk for some mental problems. For exam- ple, compared with heterosexual men and women, gay-identified men and lesbian-identified have higher rates of anxiety disorders and depression (Bostwick et al., 2010). Whether gay and lesbian people are at increased risk for suicide remains controversial (Savin-Williams, 2006), with a recent population study finding no increased risk for gay men (Cochran & Mays, 2011). Lesbians also have a higher rate of substance abuse (Herek & Garnets, 2007; Sandfort et al., 2001). Although it remains unclear why homosexual people have higher rates of certain problems (Bailey, 1999; Cochran, 2012), one plausible explanation is that such problems result from stressful life events related to societal stig- matizing of homosexuality (Herek & Garnets, 2007). Regardless, homosexuality is compatible with psychological health—most gay men and lesbians do not have mental disorders. During the past 50 years gay men and lesbians have made momentous progress toward legal rights and social acceptance in much of the developed world. For example, in 2010 for the first time a majority of Americans viewed homosexual relations
between adults as morally acceptable (Gallup, 2010). A plurality of Americans now support marriage for same-sex couples (Smith, 2011), and in many nations and in several U.S. states, gay men and lesbians have the legal right to marry. In some parts of the world, however, progress toward equal rights and acceptance has lagged far behind. In some countries in Africa and the Middle East, large majorities disapprove of homosexuality (Pew Research Center, 2007), and in a few of those countries homosexual people may be subject to capital punishment. The marked cross-cultural and historical variation in treatment of homosexual people should remind us to be cautious in assuming that a currently unpopular or uncommon trait is pathological without careful and persuasive analysis. Sometimes it is culture that is the problem.  in review  •   What does each of the three examples of sociocultural influ- ences on sexual practices and standards reveal about cultural differences and historical changes in what is considered accept- able and normal sexual behavior?  •   How has the psychiatric view of homosexuality changed over time? Identify a few key historical events that propelled this change.  Gender Dysphoria  In   DSM-5 , there is a new classification for the   DSM-IV-TR   “Sex- ual and Gender Variants” referred to as Gender Dysphoria. This reflects a change in the way these diagnostic groups are defined. The phenomenon of “gender incongruence” is emphasized instead of “cross-gender identification” that was emphasized in  DSM-IV   Gender Identity Disorder. We will examine two general categories: the paraphillias and gender identity disorders.  The Paraphilias  People with   paraphilias   have recurrent, intense sexually arousing fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors that generally involve (1) nonhu- man objects, (2) the suffering or humiliation of oneself or one’s part- ner, or (3) children or other nonconsenting persons. Paraphilias have challenged authors of past   DSM   editions for two main reasons. First, some paraphilias—especially pedophilia—are widely considered pathological even if the paraphilic individual does not experience distress. For example, consider a pedophile who has molested chil- dren but does not feel guilty. Most people believe that such a man has a mental disorder. In the past, pedophilia has been diagnosed even in the absence of distress; so have frotteurism and exhibition- ism, both of which typically involve nonconsenting individuals in sexual acts. A second challenge has been that some other categories of paraphilias may be compatible with psychological health and happiness. For example, some men who have a foot fetish are com- fortable with their sexual interest and even find willing partners who happily indulge them, while some others feel substantial shame and guilt (Bergner, 2009). In the past, only foot fetishists with intense shame and guilt (or other problems related to their fetish) would be diagnosed as paraphilic. But surely, both happy and distressed foot fetishists have the same paraphilia. A useful distinction to be included in   DSM-5   is that between paraphilias and paraphilic disor- ders (Blanchard, 2010). Paraphilias are unusual sexual interests, but they need not cause harm either to the individual or to others. Only if they cause such harm do they become paraphilic disorders. Thus, foot fetishists have a paraphilia, but only those who suffer due to their sexual interest have a paraphilic disorder. Although mild forms of these conditions probably occur in the lives of many normal people, a paraphilic person is distin- guished by the insistence, and in some cases the relative exclu- sivity, with which his sexuality focuses on the acts or objects in question—without which orgasm is sometimes impossible. Para- philias also frequently have a compulsive quality, and some indi- viduals with paraphilias require orgasmic release as often as 4 to 10 times per day (Garcia & Thibaut, 2010). Individuals with paraphilias may or may not have persistent desires to change their sexual preferences. Because nearly all such persons are male (a fact whose etiological implications we consider later), we use masculine pronouns to refer to them (see Fedoroff et al., 1999, for some possible examples of women with paraphilias). No one knows how common different paraphilias are. Good prevalence data do not exist, in part because people are often reluctant to disclose such deviant behavior (Griffifths, 2012). The  DSM-5   recognizes eight specific paraphilias: (1) fetishism, (2) transvestic fetishism, (3) voyeurism, (4) exhibitionism, (5) sexual sadism, (6) sexual masochism, (7) pedophilia, and (8) frotteurism (rubbing one’s genital area against a nonconsenting person). An additional category, paraphilias not otherwise specified, includes several rarer disorders such as telephone scatologia (obscene phone calls), necrophilia (sexual desire for corpses), zoophilia (sexual interest in animals; Aggrawal, 2011), apotemnophilia (sexual excitement and desire about having a limb amputated), and coprophilia (sexual arousal to feces). Although some of different paraphilias tend to co-occur together, we will discuss each of them separately. In addition, our discussion of pedophilia is postponed until a later section concerning sexual abuse.  FeTisHisTiC DisoRDeR   In   fetishism , the individual has re- current, intense sexually arousing fantasies, urges, and behaviors involving the use of some inanimate object or a part of the body not typically found erotic (e.g., feet) to obtain sexual gratifica- tion (see “ DSM-5   Criteria for Several Different Paraphilic Dis- orders”). As is generally true for the paraphilias, reported cases of female fetishists are extremely rare (Mason, 1997). Usually the fetishistic object is required or strongly preferred during sexual arousal and activity. Many men have a strong sexual fascination for paraphernalia such as bras, garter belts, hose, and high heels, but most do not typically meet diagnostic criteria for fetishism because the paraphernalia are not necessary or strongly preferred for sexual arousal. Nevertheless, they do illustrate the relatively high frequency of fetish-like preferences among men. Fetishism occurs frequently in the context of sadomasochistic activity but is relatively rare among sexual offenders (Kafka, 2010).
criteria for  Several Different Paraphilic Disorders  Fetishistic Disorder A.   Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from either the use of nonliving objects or a highly specific focus on nongenital body part(s), as mani- fested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.  B.   The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  C.   The fetish objects are not limited to articles of clothing used in cross-dressing (as in transvestic disorder) or devices specifically designed for the purpose of tactile genital stim- ulation (e.g., vibrator).  Transvestic Disorder A.   Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from cross-dressing, as manifested by fanta- sies, urges, or behaviors.  B.   The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  Voyeuristic Disorder A.   Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from observing an unsuspecting person who is naked, in the process of disrobing, or engaging in sexual activity, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.  B.   The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a noncon- senting person, or the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  C.   The individual experiencing the arousal and/or acting on the urges is at least 18 years of age.  exhibitionistic Disorder A.   Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the exposure of one’s genitals to an unsuspecting person, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.  B.   The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a noncon- senting person, or the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  sexual sadism Disorder A.   Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the physical or psychological suffering of another person, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.  B.   The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a non- consenting person, or the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa- tional, or other important areas of functioning.  sexual Masochism Disorder A.   Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer, as manifested by fan- tasies, urges, or behaviors.  B.   The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  Pedophilic Disorder A.   Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent, intense sexu- ally arousing fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving sexual activity with a prepubescent child or children (gener- ally age 13 years or younger).  B.   The individual has acted on these sexual urges, or the sexual urges or fantasies cause marked distress or interpersonal difficulty.  C.   The individual is at least age 16 years and at least 5 years older than the child or children in Criterion A.  note:   Do not include an individual in late adolescence involved in an ongoing sexual relationship with a 12- or 13-year-old.  Frotteuristic Disorder A.   Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sex- ual arousal from touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting person, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.  B.   The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a non- consenting person, or the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa- tional, or other important areas of functioning. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  DSM- 5  The mode of using these objects to achieve sexual excitation and gratification varies considerably, but it commonly involves masturbating while kissing, fondling, tasting, or smelling the objects. In the context of consensual sexual relationships, fetish- ism does not normally interfere with the rights of others. How- ever, some partners who do not share an erotic fascination with a fetishistic object may understandably object to participating. Some paraphilic men are so ashamed of their desires that they cannot bring themselves to ask partners. Bergner (2009) relates the case of a foot fetishist who chooses chemical castration to suppress his desire rather than tell his wife. To obtain the required object, some men with fetishes may commit burglary, theft, or even assault. The articles most com- monly stolen by such individuals are probably women’s undergar- ments. In such cases, the excitement and suspense of the criminal act itself typically reinforce the sexual stimulation and sometimes
actually constitute the fetish, the stolen article itself being of little importance. One example of this pattern of fetishism is provided in the case of a man whose fetish was women’s panties:  Panties   A single, 32-year-old male freelance photogra- pher . . . related that although he was somewhat sexually attracted by women, he was far more attracted by “their panties.” . . . [His] sexual excitement began about age 7, when he came upon a por- nographic magazine and felt stimulated by pictures of partially nude women wearing “panties.” His first ejaculation occurred at 13 via masturbation to fantasies of women wearing panties. He masturbated into his older sister’s panties, which he had stolen without her knowledge. Subsequently he stole panties from her friends and from other women he met socially. . . . The pattern of masturbating into women’s underwear had been his preferred method of achieving sexual excitement and orgasm from adoles- cence until the present consultation. Source: Adapted with permission from the   DSM III Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Third Edition,   Case Book , (Copyright ©1981). American Psychiatric Association.  One common hypothesis regarding the etiology of fetishism emphasizes the importance of classical conditioning and social learning (e.g., Hoffmann, 2012). For example, it is not difficult to imagine how women’s underwear might become eroticized via its close association with sex and the female body. But only a small number of men develop fetishes, so even if the hypothesis has merit there must be individual differences in conditionability of sexual responses (just as there are differences in the condition- ability of fear and anxiety responses, as discussed in Chapter 6). Men high in sexual conditionability would be prone to develop- ing one or more fetishes. We will return later to the role of con- ditioning in the development of paraphilias more generally.  TRAnsVesTiC DisoRDeR   According to   DSM-5 , heterosexual men who experience recurrent, intense sexually arousing fanta- sies, urges, or behaviors that involve cross-dressing as a female may be diagnosed with   transvestic disorder,   if they experience significant distress or impairment due to the condition (see “ DSM-5   Criteria” on p. 410). Although some gay men dress “in drag” on occasion, they do not typically do this for sexual plea- sure and hence do not have the paraphilia transvestism. Typi- cally, the onset of transvestism is during adolescence and involves masturbation while wearing female clothing or undergarments. Blanchard (1989, 2010) has hypothesized that the psychologi- cal motivation of most heterosexual transvestites includes   auto- gynephilia:   paraphilic sexual arousal by the thought or fantasy of being a woman (Blanchard, 1991, 1993; Lawrence, 2013). The great sexologist Magnus Hirschfeld first identified a class of cross-dressing men who are sexually aroused by the image of themselves as women: “They feel attracted not by the women outside them, but by the woman inside them” (Hirschfeld, 1948, p. 167). Not all men with transvestic fetishism show clear evidence of autogynephilia (Blanchard, 2010). The others seem quite similar to typical fetishists, focusing on specifics of their preferred female clothing and without having clearly apparent fantasies of becoming women. Among transvestic fetishists, strength of autogynephilic fantasies strongly predicts  gender dysphoria   and desire for sex reassignment surgery (Blanchard, 2010). Like other kinds of fetishism, transvestic fetishism causes overt harm to others only when accompanied by such an illegal act as theft or destruction of property. Such acts are rare, and the vast majority of transvestites are harmless. One large survey of over 2,400 men and women in Sweden estimated that almost 3 percent of the men and 0.4 percent of the women reported having engaged in at least one episode of erotic cross-dressing, but the actual prevalence of the disorder is likely much lower (Langstrom & Zucker, 2005). This same study reported on various demographic and experiential differ- ences between the men who had cross-dressed and those who had not. Among the most interesting findings were that the men who had cross-dressed had experienced more sexual abuse before age 10, were more easily sexually aroused, had a higher frequency of masturbation, made greater use of pornography, and had other paraphilias. An earlier survey of over 1,000 men who frequently crossed-dressed reported that the vast majority (87 percent) were heterosexual, 83 percent had married, and 60 percent were mar- ried at the time of the survey (Docter & Prince, 1997). Many managed to keep their cross-dressing a secret, at least for a while. However, wives often found out and had a wide range of reac- tions, from accepting to being extremely disturbed. The following case illustrates both the typical early onset of transvestic fetishism and the difficulties the condition may raise in a marriage.  A Transvestite’s Dilemma   Mr. A., a 65-year-old security guard, formerly a fishing-boat captain, is distressed about his wife’s objections to his wearing a nightgown at home in the evening now that his youngest child has left home. His appearance and demeanor, except when he is dressing in wom- en’s clothes, are always appropriately masculine, and he is exclu- sively heterosexual. Occasionally, over the past 5 years, he has worn an inconspicuous item of female clothing even when dressed as a man, sometimes a pair of panties. . . . He always carries a photograph of himself dressed as a woman. His first recollection of an interest in female clothing was putting on his sister’s bloomers at age 12, an act accompanied by sexual excitement. He continued periodically to put on wom- en’s underpants—an activity that invariably resulted in an erec- tion, sometimes a spontaneous emission, sometimes masturba- tion. . . . He was competitive and aggressive with other boys and always acted “masculine.” During his single years he was always attracted to girls. . . . His involvement with female clothes was of the same inten- sity even after his marriage. Beginning at age 45, after a chance
exposure to a magazine called   Transvestia , he began to increase his cross-dressing activity. He learned there were other men like himself, and he became more and more preoccupied with female clothing in fantasy and progressed to periodically dressing com- pletely as a woman. More recently he has become involved in a transvestite network . . . occasionally attending transvestite parties. Although still committed to his marriage, sex with his wife has dwindled over the past 20 years as his waking thoughts and activities have become increasingly centered on cross- dressing. . . . He always has an increased urge to dress as a woman when under stress; it has a tranquilizing effect. If particular circumstances prevent him from cross-dressing, he feels extremely frustrated. . . . Because of disruptions in his early life, the patient has always treasured the steadfastness of his wife and the order of his home. He told his wife about his cross-dressing practice when they were married, and she was accepting so long as he kept it to himself. Nevertheless, he felt guilty . . . and periodi- cally he attempted to renounce the practice, throwing out all his female clothes and makeup. His children served as a barrier to his giving free rein to his impulses. Following his retirement from fishing, and in the absence of his children, he finds himself more drawn to cross-dressing, more in conflict with his wife, and more depressed. Source: Adapted with permission   DSM-IV-TR Casebook: A Learning Companion to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,  Fourth Edition, Text Revision (pp. 257–59). (Copyright © 2002). American Psychiatric Association.  VoyeuRisTiC DisoRDeR   A person is diagnosed with  voyeurism   according to   DSM-5   if he has recurrent, intense sexu- ally arousing fantasies, urges, or behaviors involving the observation of unsuspecting females who are undressing or of couples engaging in sexual activity (see “ DSM-5   Criteria” on p. 410). Frequently, such individuals masturbate during their peeping activity. Peeping Toms, as they are commonly called, commit these offenses primar- ily as young men. Voyeurism often co-occurs with exhibitionism, and it is also associated with interest in sadomasochism and cross- dressing (Langstrom & Seto, 2006). Voyeurism is probably the most common illegal sexual activity (Langstrom, 2010). How do some young men develop this pattern? First, viewing the body of an attractive female is sexually stimulat- ing for most heterosexual men. In addition, the privacy and mystery that have traditionally surrounded sexual activities tend to increase curiosity about them. Third, if a young man with such curiosity feels shy and inadequate in his relations with the opposite sex, he may accept the substitute of voyeurism, which satisfies his curiosity and to some extent meets his sexual needs without the trauma of actually approaching a female. He thus avoids the rejection and lowered self-status that such an approach might bring. In fact, voyeuristic activities often provide important compensatory feelings of power and secret domination over an unsuspecting victim, which may contribute to the maintenance of this pattern. If a voyeur manages to find a wife in spite of his interpersonal difficulties, as many do, he is rarely well-adjusted sexually in his relationship with his wife, as the following case illustrates.  A Peeping Tom   A young, married college student had an attic apartment that was extremely hot during the summer months. To enable him to attend school, his wife worked; she came home at night tired and irritable and not in the mood for sexual relations. In addition, “the damned springs in the bed squeaked.” In order “to obtain some sexual gratification,” the youth would peer through his binoculars at the room next door and occasionally saw the young couple there engaged in erotic activities. This stimulated him greatly, and he decided to extend his peeping to a sorority house. During his second venture, how- ever, he was reported and was apprehended by the police. This offender was quite immature for his age, rather puritanical in his attitude toward masturbation, and prone to indulge in rich but immature sexual fantasies.  More permissive laws concerning “adult” movies, videos, and magazines in recent years have removed some of the secrecy about sexual behavior and also have provided an alternative source of gratification for would-be voyeurs. However, for many voyeurs, these movies and magazines probably do not provide an adequate substitute for secretly watching the sexual behavior of an unsuspecting couple or the “real-life” nudity of a woman who mistakenly believes she enjoys privacy. Moreover, the actual effect of these “adult materials” on voyeurism is a matter of speculation because there never have been good epidemiological data on the prevalence of this paraphilia, although it is thought to be one of the most common paraphilias (Langstrom, 2010). The large Swedish survey mentioned earlier that was conducted with over 2,400 men and women found that 11.5 percent of the men and 3.0 percent of the women had at some time engaged in voyeuristic activity (Langstrom & Seto, 2006). Among those who did report such activity, they also reported more psychological problems, less satisfaction with life, higher rates of masturbation, greater use of pornography, and greater ease of sexual arousability. Although a voyeur may become reckless in his behavior and thus may be detected or even apprehended by the police, voyeur- ism does not ordinarily have any other serious criminal or anti- social behaviors associated with it. In fact, many people probably have some voyeuristic inclinations, which are checked by practi- cal considerations such as the possibility of being caught and by ethical attitudes concerning the right to privacy.  exHiBiTionisTiC DisoRDeR   Exhibitionistic disorder   ( inde- cent exposure   in legal terms) is diagnosed in a person with recur- rent, intense urges, fantasies, or behaviors that involve exposing his genitals to others (usually strangers) in inappropriate circumstances
and without their consent (see “ DSM-5   Criteria” on p. 410). Fre- quently the element of shock in the victim is highly arousing to these individuals. The exposure may take place in some secluded location such as a park or in a more public place such as a depart- ment store, church, theater, or bus. In cities, an exhibitionist (also known as a flasher) often drives by schools or bus stops, exhibits himself while in the car, and then drives rapidly away. In many instances the exposure is repeated under fairly constant conditions, such as only in churches or buses or in the same general vicinity and at the same time of day. In one case, a youth exhibited himself only at the top of an escalator in a large department store. For a male offender, the typical victim is ordinarily a young or middle- aged female who is not known to the offender, although children and adolescents may also be targeted (Murphy, 1997). Exhibitionism, which usually begins in adolescence or young adulthood, is the most common sexual offense reported to the police in the United States, Canada, and Europe, accounting for about one-third of all sexual offenses (McAnulty et al., 2001; Murphy, 1997). According to some estimates, as many as 20 per- cent of women have been the target of either exhibitionism or voyeurism (Kaplan & Krueger, 1997; Meyer, 1995). Although there are no good epidemiological data on the prevalence of this paraphilia, the large Swedish survey of over 2,400 people men- tioned earlier reported that 4.1 percent of the men and 2.1 per- cent of the women had had at least one episode of exhibitionistic behavior (Langstrom & Seto, 2006). It commonly co-occurs with voyeurism and also tends to co-occur with sadomasochistic inter- ests and cross-dressing (Langstrom, 2010). Exhibitionism is asso- ciated with greater psychological problems, lower life satisfaction, greater use of pornography, and more frequent masturbation. In some instances, exposure of the genitals is accompanied by suggestive gestures or masturbation, but more often there is only exposure. A significant minority of exhibitionists commit aggressive acts, sometimes including coercive sex crimes against adults or children. Some men who expose themselves may do so because they have antisocial personality disorder, as described in  0, rather than a paraphilia (Langstrom, 2010). Despite the rarity of aggressive or assaultive behavior in these cases, an exhibitionistic act nevertheless takes place with- out the viewer’s consent and may be emotionally upsetting, as is indeed the perpetrator’s intent. This intrusive quality of the act, together with its explicit violation of propriety norms about “private parts,” ensures condemnation. Thus society considers exhibitionism a criminal offense.  FRoTTeuRisTiC DisoRDeR   Frotteurism   is sexual excitement at rubbing one’s genitals against, or touching, the body of a noncon- senting person. As with voyeurism, frotteurism reflects inappropriate and persistent interest in something that many people enjoy in a consensual context. Frotteurism commonly co-occurs with voyeur- ism and exhibitionism (Langstrom, 2010). Being the victim of a frotteuristic act is fairly common among regular riders of crowded buses or subway trains. Some have speculated that frotteurs’ willing- ness to touch others sexually without their consent means that they are at risk for more serious sexual offending, but there is currently no evidence supporting this concern (Langstrom, 2010). Because frotteurism typically requires unwilling participation of others, frot- teuristic disorder is diagnosed if frotteuristic acts occur, whether or not the frotteurer is, himself, bothered by his urges.  sexuAl sADisM DisoRDeR   The term   sadism   is derived from the name of the Marquis de Sade (1740–1814), who for sexual purposes, inflicted such cruelty on his victims that he was eventu- ally committed as insane. In   DSM-5 , for a diagnosis of sadism, a person must have recurrent, intense sexually arousing fantasies, urges, or behaviors that involve inflicting psychological or physi- cal pain on another individual (see “ DSM-5   Criteria” on p. 410). Sadistic fantasies often include themes of dominance, control, and humiliation (Kirsh & Becker, 2007). A closely related, but less severe, pattern is the practice of “bondage and discipline” (B & D), which may include tying a person up, hitting or spank- ing, and so on to enhance sexual excitement. The large majority of sexually sadistic acts probably occur in the context of a consen- sual sexual relationship without any evident harm. In large urban communities, there is often a BDSM subculture consisting of in- dividuals who enjoy mild sadism, masochism, bondage, and dis- cipline. It is thus important to distinguish transient or occasional interest in sadomasochistic practices from sadism as a paraphilia. Surveys have found that perhaps 5 to 15 percent of men and women enjoy sadistic and/or masochistic activities voluntarily on occasion (Baumeister & Butler, 1997; Hucker, 1997). A small minority of men with sexual sadism, in contrast, enjoy inflicting sadistic acts that are nonconsensual, serious, and sometimes fatal (Chang & Heide, 2009; Dietz et al., 1990; Krueger, 2010) In some cases, sadistic activities lead up to or terminate in actual sexual relations; in others, full sexual grati- fication is obtained from the sadistic practice alone. A sadist,  Men who engage in exhibitionism often cause emotional distress in the viewers because of the intrusive quality of the act, along with its explicit violation of propriety norms.
for example, might slash a woman with a razor or stick her with a needle, experiencing an orgasm in the process. The pain inflicted by sadists may come from whipping, biting, cutting, or burning; the act may vary in intensity, from fantasy to severe mutilation and even murder. Paraphilic sadism and masoch- ism, in which sadomasochistic activities are the preferred or exclusive means to sexual gratification, are much rarer; not uncommonly, they co-occur in the same individual (Kirsh & Becker, 2007).   DSM-5   requires that the diagnosis of sadism be reserved for cases either in which the victim is nonconsent- ing or in which the sadistic experience is marked by distress or interpersonal difficulties. Many cases of sexual sadism have comorbid disorders—especially the narcissistic, schizoid, or antisocial personality disorders (Kirsh & Becker, 2007). Per- haps sexual sadists with these personality disorders are espe- cially non-empathic and thus likely to act on their sexual urges. Extreme sexual sadists may mentally replay their torture scenes later while masturbating. Serial killers, who tend to be sexual sadists, sometimes record or videotape their sadistic acts. One study characterized 20 sexually sadistic serial killers who were responsible for 149 murders throughout the United States and Canada (Warren et al., 1996). Most were white males in their late 20s or early 30s. Their murders were remarkably con- sistent over time, reflecting sexual arousal to the pain, fear, and panic of their victims. Choreographed assaults allowed them to carefully control their victims’ deaths. Some of the men reported that the God-like sense of being in control of the life and death of another human being was especially exhilarating. Eighty-five percent of the sample reported consistent violent sexual fantasies, and 75 percent collected materials with a violent theme includ- ing audiotapes, videotapes, pictures, or sketches of their sadistic acts or sexually sadistic pornography. Notorious serial killers include Ted Bundy, who was executed in 1989. Bundy confessed to the murder of over 30 young women, nearly all of whom fit a targeted type: women with long hair parted in the middle. Bundy admitted that he used his victims to re-create the covers of detective magazines or scenes from “slasher movies.” Jeffrey Dahmer was convicted in 1992 of having mutilated and murdered 15 boys and young men, generally having sex with them after death. (He was sub- sequently murdered in prison.) Dennis Rader, the BTK Killer (for Bind, Torture, Kill), was captured in 2005 after commit- ting 10 murders over 30 years in Wichita, Kansas. Rader exem- plifies several interesting phenomena associated with homicidal sexual sadism. As a child he tortured animals and fantasized about tying up and torturing attractive children he watched on television. When he began enacting his fantasies, he stalked his victims for weeks to learn their habits before he attacked them. He enjoyed tying them up and then strangled them. Only after they were dead would he gratify himself sexually through mas- turbation. He often retained clothing of his victims, which he would sometimes wear. Sometimes in private he would practice bondage on himself because he found this erotic. What causes some men to be sexually sadistic killers? Although many sadists have had chaotic childhoods, Bundy, Dahmer, and Rader all came from apparently stable and lov- ing families. Unfortunately, we do not have a good under- standing of the causal factors involved in these extreme cases of sadism. Sexual sadism is understandably an important concern of criminologists, law enforcement officers, and forensic mental health professionals. Unfortunately, the diagnosis of sexual sadism is not very reliable (Marshall & Hucker, 2006) or valid (Kingston et al., 2010), perhaps due to the sadist’s unwillingness to his sometimes appallingly violent sexual fantasies (Nietschke et al., 2012). This is concerning, given how important it is to detect dangerous sexual sadists and how stigmatizing a diagnosis of sexual sadism might be to someone whose sexual desires are harmless. One promising modification currently being consid- ered is a dimensional approach that could distinguish sexual sadists who are dangerous from those who are not (Krueger, 2010; Marshall & Hucker, 2006). Another is to focus on behav- ioral indicators of sadism, which are sometimes more apparent (Nietschke et al., 2012).  sexuAl MAsoCHisM DisoRDeR   The term   masochism  is derived from the name of the Austrian novelist Leopold V. Sacher-Masoch (1836–1895), whose fictional charac- ters dwelt lovingly on the sexual pleasure of pain. In sexual  Dennis Rader was married with two children, an active member in his church, and a respected member of the community; he was also a serial killer known as the BTK killer.
masochism, a person experiences sexual stimulation and gratification from the experience of pain and degradation in relating to a lover. According to   DSM-5   (see “ DSM-5   Crite- ria” on p. 410), the person must have experienced recurrent, intense sexually arousing fantasies, urges, or behaviors in- volving the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or other- wise made to suffer. Consensual sadomasochistic relationships, involving a dominant, sadistic “master” and a submissive, masochistic “slave” are not uncommon in either heterosexual or homo- sexual relationships. Such masochists do not usually want, or cooperate with, true sexual sadists and prefer individuals will- ing to hurt or humiliate them within preset limits. Masochism appears to be more common than sadism and occurs in both men and women (Baumeister & Butler, 1997; Sandnabba et al., 2002). Sadomasochistic activities, including bondage and discipline, are often performed communally within “dungeons” popular in major cities. Such activities might involve men being bound and whipped by women called “dominatrixes,” who wear tight leather or rubber outfits and are paid to inflict pain and humiliation in a sexually charged sense. Most mem- bers of this sadomasochistic community are high functioning and do not appear to suffer because of their sexual interests (Krueger, 2010).   Watch   the   Video   Jocelyn: Exploring Sexual Sadism and Masochism   on   MyPsychLab .  Some rare forms of masochism are more problematic, however. One particularly dan- gerous form of masochism, called   autoerotic asphyxia , involves self- strangulation. Although some writers have speculated that loss of oxygen to the brain intensifies orgasm, there is little evidence that this motivates practitioners of autoerotic asphyxia. In contrast, studies of such practitioners have found that their sexual fanta- sies are strongly masochistic (Hucker, 2011). Coroners in most major U.S. cities are familiar with cases in which the deceased is found hanged next to masochistic pornographic literature or other sexual paraphernalia. Accidental deaths attributable to this practice have been estimated to range between 500 and 1,000 per year in the United States (LeVay & Baldwin, 2012). Although autoerotic asphyxia is much more common in men, it can occur in women too, and it has occurred across many cultures going back hundreds of years. In some cases it occurs in a consensual or nonconsensual sadomasochistic act between two or more people (McGrath & Turvey, 2008). The following is a case of autoerotic asphyxia with a tragic ending.  “I Got Tangled in the Rope”   A woman heard a man shouting for help and went to his apartment door. . . . The woman with her two sons . . . broke into the apartment. They found the man lying on the floor, his hands tied behind him, his legs bent back, and his ankles secured to his hands. A mop handle had been placed behind his knees. He was visibly distraught, sweating, and short of breath, and his hands were turning blue. He had defecated and urinated in his trousers. In his kitchen the woman found a knife and freed him. When police officers arrived and questioned the man, he stated that he had returned home that afternoon, fallen asleep on his couch, and awakened an hour later only to find himself hopelessly bound. The officers noted that the apartment door had been locked when the neighbors broke in . . . [and] when the officers filed their report, they noted that “this could possibly be a sexual deviation act.” Interviewed the next day, the man con- fessed to binding himself in the position in which he was found. A month later, the police were called back to the same man’s apartment. A building manager had discovered him face down on the floor in his apartment. A paper bag cov- ered his head like a hood. When the police arrived, the man was breathing rapidly with a satin cloth stuffed in his mouth. Rope was stretched around his head and mouth and wrapped his chest and waist. Several lengths ran from his back to his crotch, and ropes at his ankles had left deep marks. A broom handle locked his elbows behind his back. Once freed, the man explained, “While doing isometric exercises, I got tangled up in the rope.” . . . Two years passed and the man moved on to another job. He failed to appear for work one Monday morning. A fellow employee found him dead in his apartment. During their investigation, police were able to reconstruct the man’s final minutes. On the preced- ing Friday, he had bound himself in the following manner: sitting on his bed and crossing his ankles, left over right, he had bound them together with twine. Fastening a tie around his neck, he then secured the tie to an 86-inch pole behind his back. . . . [By a com- plicated set of maneuvers he applied] pressure to the pole, still secured to the tie around his neck, [and] strangled himself. Source: Adapted with permission from   DSM-IV-TR Casebook: A Learning Companion to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,  Fourth Edition, Text Revision (pp. 86–88). (Copyright © 2002). American Psychiatric Association. Sadomasochistic activities, including bondage and discipline, are often performed communally within “dungeons” popular in major cities.
Causal Factors and Treatments for Paraphilias  Many individuals with paraphilias have explanations for their unusual sexual preferences. For example, one amputee para- philic (whose preference was a partner with a missing limb) recalled that his fascination with female amputees originated during adolescence. He was neglected emotionally by his cold family but heard a family member express sympathetic feelings for an amputee. He developed the wish that he would become an amputee and thus earn their sympathy (see First, 2005, for a discussion of this paraphilia, known as   apotemnophilia ). This story raises many questions. Emotionally cold families are not uncommon, and sympathy for amputees is nearly universal. Cer- tainly not every male in a cold family who detects sympathy for amputees develops an amputee paraphilia. Such stories do not necessarily have any validity because we are often unaware of the forces that shape us (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977). Several facts about paraphilia are likely to be important in their development. First, as we have already noted, nearly all persons with paraphilias are male; females with most paraphil- ias are so rare that they are found in the literature only as case reports or a series of case reports (e.g., Fedoroff et al., 1999). Second, paraphilias usually begin around the time of puberty or early adolescence. Third, people with paraphilias often have a strong sex drive, with some men often masturbating many times a day. Fourth, people with paraphilias frequently have more than one. For example, the corpses of men who died accidentally in the course of autoerotic asphyxia were partially or fully cross-dressed in 25 to 33 percent of cases (Blanchard & Hucker, 1991). There is no obvious reason for the association between sexual masochism and transvestism. Why should it be so? Money (1986) and others have suggested that male vulner- ability to paraphilias is closely linked to their greater dependence on visual sexual imagery. Perhaps sexual arousal in men depends on physical stimulus features to a greater degree than in women, whose arousal may depend more on emotional context such as being in love with a partner. If so, men may be more vulnerable to forming sexual associations to nonsexual stimuli, which may be most likely to occur after puberty, when the sexual drive is high. Many believe that these associations arise as a result of classical and instrumental conditioning and/or social learning that occurs through observation and modeling. When observing paraphilic stimuli (e.g., photographs of models in their underwear), or when fantasies about paraphilic stimuli occur, boys may masturbate, and the reinforcement by orgasm-release may serve to condition an intense attraction to paraphilic stimuli (e.g., Kaplan & Krueger, 1997; LeVay & Baldwin, 2012). This hypothesis cannot explain, however, why only a small minority of males develop fetishes for panties and bras, despite the nearly universal experience of mastur- bating to pictures or videos of women wearing them.  TReATMenTs FoR PARAPHiliAs   The vast majority of stud- ies concerning the treatment of paraphilias have been conducted with sex offenders. The literature concerning treatment of men with paraphilias who have not committed any offense, or who have victimless paraphilias (e.g., masochism), consists primarily of case reports because most people with paraphilias do not seek treatment for these conditions. Thus we defer discussion of the treatment of paraphilias until we discuss the treatment of sex offenders, many of whom have paraphilias.  gender Dysphoria  In   DSM-5   Gender   Dysphoria has replaced   Gender Identity Dis- order.   “Gender dysphoria” is discomfort with one’s sex-relevant physical characteristics or with one’s assigned gender. The change in terminology is both usefully descriptive and theoretically neutral. That is, individuals who have been previously diagnosed with gender identity disorder certainly experience gender dys- phoria, but whether or not this is always due to atypical gender identity development is less clear. Gender dysphoria also is con- sistent with a dimensional approach (the degree of dysphoria can vary) and may fluctuate over time within the same individual (Cohen-Kettenis & Pfafflin, 2010). Gender dysphoria can be  Men’s vulnerability to paraphilias such as fetishism may be a result of their greater dependence on visual stimuli. This in turn makes them more likely to form sexual associations to nonsexual stimuli such as women’s legs or high-heeled shoes, quite possibly through a process of classical conditioning.
diagnosed at two different life stages, either during adolescence or adulthood (i.e., gender dysphoria in adolescents and adults) or childhood (gender dysphoria in children).   Watch   the   Video  Travis: Gender Dysphoria   on   MyPsychLab .  genDeR DysPHoRiA in CHilDHooD   Boys with gender dysphoria show a marked preoccupation with traditionally femi- nine activities (Zucker, 2010; Zucker & Bradley, 1995). They may prefer to dress in female clothing. They enjoy stereotypical girls’ activities such as playing dolls and playing house. They usually avoid rough-and-tumble play and often express the desire to be a girl. Boys with gender dysphoria are often ostracized as “sissies” by their peers. Girls with gender dysphoria typically balk at parents’ attempts to dress them in traditional feminine clothes such as dresses, preferring boys’ clothing and short hair. Fantasy heroes typically include powerful male figures like Bat- man and Superman. They show little interest in dolls and increased interest in sports. Although mere tomboys fre- quently have many or most of these traits, girls with gender identity disorder are distinguished by their desire to be a boy or to grow up as a man. Young girls with gender dysphoria are treated better by their peers than are boys with gender dysphoria because cross-gender behavior in girls is better tolerated (Cohen-Kettenis et al., 2003; Zucker et al., 1997). In clinic-referred gender dysphoria, boys outnumbered girls five to one in one study (Cohen-Kettenis et al., 2003) and by three to one in another study (Cohen-Kettenis et al., 2006). An appreciable percentage of that imbalance may reflect greater parental concern about femininity in boys than about masculinity in girls. The most common adult outcome of boys with gender dysphoria has been homosexuality rather than transsexualism (Zucker, 2005). In Richard Green’s (1987) prospective study of 44 very feminine boys from the community, only one sought sex change surgery by age 18. About three-quarters became gay or bisexual men who were evidently satisfied with their biological sex. However, several later studies of clinic-referred children have found that 10 to 20 percent of boys with gender dysphoria later were diagnosed as transsexual by age 16 or 18, and about 40 to 60 percent identified themselves as homosexual or bisexual, a percentage that may have increased by the time they were older (Zucker, 2005). There are several smaller pro- spective studies of girls with gender dysphoria that have shown that 35 to 45 percent may show persistent gender dysphoria (leading to a desire for sex reassignment surgery in many), and approximately half had a homosexual orientation. However, the largest prospective study to date, which followed 25 girls with gender dysphoria (ages 3–12) into young adulthood (average age 23), found somewhat lower rates of persistent gender dys- phoria and homosexuality. At follow-up, three were classified as being dissatisfied with their gender, and two of these three wanted to have sex reassignment surgery. However, 32 percent had homosexual or bisexual fantasies, and 24 percent engaged in homosexual or bisexual behavior. These rates are clearly much higher than expected from base rates of gender dysphoria in the population but not as high as in boys with gender dysphoria (Drummond et al., 2008).  gender Dysphoria in Children A.   A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/ expressed gender and assigned gender, of at least 6 months’ duration, as manifested by at least six of the following (one of which must be Criterion A1):  1.   A strong desire to be of the other gender or an insistence that one is the other gender (or some alternative gender different from one’s assigned gender).  2.   In boys (assigned gender), a strong preference for cross- dressing or simulating female attire; or in girls (assigned gender), a strong preference for wearing only typical masculine clothing and a strong resistance to the wearing of typical feminine clothing.  3.   A strong preference for cross-gender roles in make- believe play or fantasy play.  4.   A strong preference for the toys, games, or activities ste- reotypically used or engaged in by the other gender.  5.   A strong preference for playmates of the other gender.  6.   In boys (assigned gender), a strong rejection of typically masculine toys, games, and activities and a strong avoid- ance of rough-and-tumble play; or in girls (assigned gen- der), a strong rejection of typically feminine toys, games, and activities.  7.   A strong dislike of one’s sexual anatomy.  8.   A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex characteristics that match one’s experienced gender.  B.   The condition is associated with clinically significant distress or impairment in social, school, or other important areas of functioning.  source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Gender Dysphoria   DSM- 5
Given that many such children typically adjust well in adult- hood, should they be considered to have a mental disorder as children? Some have argued that such children should not be considered “disordered” because the primary obstacle to their happiness may be a society that is intolerant of cross-gender behavior. However, many researchers who work with these children maintain that the distress and unhappiness these chil- dren and adolescents have about the discrepancy between their biological sex and their psychological gender are consistent with this being called a mental disorder (e.g., Zucker, 2005, 2010). Moreover, these children are frequently mistreated by their peers and have strained relations with their parents even though their cross-gender behavior harms no one. Research from non-Western cultures shows that stigma- tization of gender-nonconforming children is not universal (Vasey & Bartlett, 2007). In Samoa, very feminine males are often considered “Fa’afafine” (roughly meaning “in the manner of women”), a kind of third gender, neither male nor female. Fa’afafine are identified as young children by their behavior and usually are accepted by their families and culture. As adults these individuals are sexually attracted to other men and typically have sexual relations with heterosexual men. They generally do not recall that their childhood gender nonconformity was associ- ated with distress. Because of this, some have argued that child- hood gender dysphoria should not appear in   DSM-5   (Vasey & Bartlett, 2007). Despite these objections, the diagnosis has been retained as gender dysphoria in children (Zucker, 2010).  Treatment   Children and adolescents with gender dys- phoria are often brought in by their parents for psychotherapy (Zucker et al., 2008). Specialists attempt both to treat the child’s unhappiness with his or her biological sex and to ease strained relations with parents and peers. Children with gender dysphoria often have other general psychological and behavioral problems such as anxiety and mood disorders that also need therapeutic attention (Zucker et al., 2002). Therapists try to improve peer and parental relations by teaching such children how to reduce their cross-gender behavior, especially in situations where it might cause interpersonal problems. Gender dysphoria is typically treated psychodynamically—that is, by examining inner conflicts. Controlled studies evaluating such treatment remain to be con- ducted (Zucker, 2005). If a child will eventually transition into the other sex, it is beneficial to prevent full sexual maturity from occurring in the original, unwanted sex. Thus, in the progressive Netherlands, under some circumstances, gender dysphoric early adolescents are given hormonal treatment to delay puberty while they decide how to proceed (Cohen-Kettenis, 2010). Two related facts about gender dysphoria in children are especially important clinically. First, as we have noted, most gen- der dysphoric children do not become gender dysphoric adults. The problem generally remits during childhood (Wallien & Cohen-Kettenis, 2008). Second, individuals who are still gender dysphoric into adolescence are likely to remain so into adulthood, and they are also likely to take medical steps to transform their bodies. The crucial age period at which many gender dysphoric children desist or persist appears to be 10 to 13 (Steensma et al., 2011). Increasing numbers of parents of gender dysphoric children cooperate with their children’s wishes and allow them socially to assume an identity opposite their birth sex (Rosin, 2008). On the one hand, this surely decreases the anguish that such children feel. On the other hand, it is plausible that this strategy will ultimately lead to more transsexual adolescent or adult outcomes.  TRAnssexuAlisM   Transsexualism   occurs in adults with gender dysphoria who desire to change their sex, and surgical ad- vances have made this goal, although expensive, partially feasible. Transsexualism represents the extreme on a continuum of trans- genderism, or the degree to which one identifies as the other sex  A.   A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/ expressed gender and assigned gender, of at least 6 months’ duration, as manifested by at least two of the following:  1.   A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/ expressed gender and primary and/or secondary sex charac- teristics (or in young adolescents, the anticipated secondary sex characteristics).  2.   A strong desire to be rid of one’s primary and/or second- ary sex characteristics because of a marked incongruence with one’s experienced/expressed gender (or in young adolescents, a desire to prevent the development of the anticipated secondary sex characteristics).  3.   A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex char- acteristics of the other gender.  4.   A strong desire to be of the other gender (or some alter- native gender different from one’s assigned gender).  5.   A strong desire to be treated as the other gender (or some alternative gender different from one’s assigned gender).  6.   A strong conviction that one has the typical feelings and reactions of the other gender (or some alternative gender different from one’s assigned gender).  B.   The condition is associated with clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Gender Dysphoria in Adolescents and Adults   DSM- 5
(Cohen-Kettenis & Pfafflin, 2010). Transsexualism is apparently a very rare disorder. In the past, European studies suggested that approximately 1 in 30,000 adult males and 1 in 100,000 adult females seek sex reassignment surgery. However, more recent es- timates suggest that about 1 in 12,000 men in Western countries has actually undergone the surgery (Lawrence, 2007). Until fairly recently, most researchers assumed that transsexualism was the adult version of childhood gender dysphoria, and indeed this is often the case. That is, many transsexuals had gender dysphoria as children (despite the fact that most children with gender dysphoria do not become transsexual), and their adult behavior is analogous. This appears to be the case for the large majority of female-to-male transsexuals (individuals born female who become male). Virtu- ally all such individuals recall being extremely tomboyish, with masculinity persisting unabated into adulthood. Most, but not all, female-to-male transsexuals are sexually attracted to women. In contrast to female-to-male transsexuals, there are at least two kinds of male-to-female transsexuals, with very different causes and developmental courses:   homosexual   and   autogynephilic transsexuals   (Bailey, 2003; Blanchard, 1989). Homosexual trans- sexual men are generally very feminine and have the same sexual orientation as gay men: They are sexually attracted to biological males (their preoperative biological sex). However, because these transsexual men experience their gender identity as female, they often define their sexual orientation as heterosexual and resent being labeled gay. Thus what is referred to in the research litera- ture as a homosexual male-to-female transsexual is a genetic male seeking a sex change operation who describes himself as a woman trapped in a man’s body and who is sexually attracted to hetero- sexual male partners (Bailey, 2003). In contrast, autogynephilic transsexuals are motivated by   autogynephilia —a paraphilia in which their attraction is to thoughts, images, or fantasies of themselves as a woman (Blanchard, 1991, 1993). Although it may not be relevant for treatment purposes (both types of trans- sexuals are appropriate candidates for sex reassignment surgery), this distinction is fundamental to understanding the diverse psy- chology of male-to-female transsexualism. Moreover, estimates show an increased prevalence in Western countries of male-to- female transsexualism in recent years, and most of this increase is in autogynephilic transsexualism (Lawrence, 2007). One important finding is that homosexual transsexuals generally have had gender dysphoria since childhood, paralleling what is found in female-to-male transsexuals, as discussed above. However, because most boys with gender dysphoria do not become transsexual adults (but instead become gay or bisexual men), there must be other important determinants of transsexu- alism. One hypothesis is that there are some prenatal hormonal influences affecting which children who develop gender identity disorder later become transsexuals (Meyer-Bahlburg, 2011). Another is that some families are more systematic in their sup- port of boys’ defeminization compared with other families. Autogynephilic (sometimes called heterosexual) transsexual- ism almost always occurs in genetic males who usually report a history of transvestic fetishism. However, unlike other transves- tites, autogynephilic transsexuals fantasize that they have female genitalia, which can lead to acute gender dysphoria, motivating their desire for sex reassignment surgery. Autogynephilic trans- sexuals may report sexual attraction to women, to both men and women, or to neither. Research has shown that these subtypes of autogynephilic transsexuals (varying in sexual orientation) are very similar to each other and differ from homosexual trans- sexuals in other important respects (Bailey, 2003; Blanchard, 1985, 1989, 1991). For example, relative to homosexual trans- sexuals, the autogynephilic transsexuals have more fetishistic and masochistic tendencies, a stronger preference for younger and more attractive partners, and a stronger interest in uncom- mitted sex (Veale et al., 2008). Unlike homosexual transsexuals, autogynephilic transsexuals do not appear to have been especially feminine in childhood or adulthood, and they typically seek sex reassignment surgery much later in life than do homosexual transsexuals (Blanchard, 1994). The causes of autogynephilic transsexualism thus probably overlap etiologically with the causes of other paraphilias (with which they often co-occur) but are not yet well understood (Veale et al., 2008). Autogynephilia remains a controversial concept among some transgender individuals, who object that autogynephilia  Mianne Bagger (a Danish-born Australian resident) is a male-to-female transsexual who has golfed professionally in women’s tournaments since 2003. She is the first known female professional golfer who was born male. Before she could play women’s tournaments, rule changes had to be implemented in Europe, Australia, and other countries so that it was no longer required that a competitor be female at birth.
is inconsistent with their experiences and that their motivation to change their sex is not sexual. Some supporters of the theory of autogynephilia attribute the denial of autogynephilia to fac- tors including sexual shame and stigmatization (Bailey & Triea, 2007). In   DSM-IV-TR   adult gender identity disorder, the distinc- tion between homosexual and autogynephilic transsexualism was recorded as a specifier: the patient’s sexual orientation. This prac- tice was intended to facilitate data collection regarding possible important clinical differences between the two types. However, for complex reasons a subgroup of transsexuals vehemently dislikes the idea that there are two different kinds of male-to-female trans- sexuals; they are especially hostile to the notion of autogynephilia (Dreger, 2008). For this reason, the specifier of sexual orientation has been removed from adult gender dysphoria in   DSM-5 . Sexual orientation (i.e., the distinction between homosexual and autogy- nephilic) appears to be a highly valid predictor of other differences between the two types of male-to-female transsexuals (Lawrence, 2010). However, this appears to be a case in which a trade-off was made between scientific rigor and social acceptability.  Treatment   Psychotherapy is usually not effective in helping adolescents or adults to resolve their gender dysphoria (Cohen- Kettenis et al., 2000; Zucker & Bradley, 1995). The only treat- ment that has been shown to be effective is surgical sex reassign- ment. Initially, transsexuals who want and are awaiting surgery are given hormone treatment. Biological men are given estrogens to facilitate breast growth, skin softening, and shrinking of muscles. Biological women are given testosterone, which suppresses men- struation, increases facial and body hair, and deepens the voice. Before they are eligible for surgery, transsexuals typically must live for many months with hormonal therapy, and they generally must live at least a year as the gender they wish to become. If they successfully complete the trial period, they undergo surgery and continue to take hormones indefinitely. In male-to-female trans- sexuals, this entails removal of the penis and testes and the creation of an artificial vagina. One fascinating study of 11 male-to-female transsexuals found that the artificial vaginal tissue created from penile tissue showed signs of sexual arousal to male erotic stimuli if the person was a homosexual male-to-female transsexual, and to female erotic stimuli if the person was an autogynephilic trans- sexual (Lawrence et al., 2005). In general, the transsexual neo- vagina is sexually functional. Male-to-female transsexuals usually also undergo extensive electrolysis to remove their beards and body hair. They also learn to raise the pitch of their voice. Female-to-male transsexuals typically are given mastectomies and hysterectomies and often have other plastic surgery to alter various facial features (such as the Adam’s apple). Only a subset of female-to-male transsexuals seeks an artificial penis because relevant surgical techniques are still somewhat primitive and very expensive. Moreover, the artificial penis is not capable of normal erection, so those who have this surgery must rely on artificial supports to have intercourse anyway. The others function sexu- ally without any penis. Does sex reassignment surgery help transsexuals lead satisfy- ing lives? In 1990 a review of the outcome literature found that 87 percent of 220 male-to-female transsexuals had satisfactory outcomes (meaning that they did not regret their decisions) and that 97 percent of 130 female-to-male transsexuals had successful outcomes (Green & Fleming, 1990). More recent studies have reported similar findings. Thus the majority of transsexuals are satisfied with the outcome of sex reassignment surgery, although there is variability in the degree of satisfaction (Cohen-Kettenis & Gooren, 1999; Lawrence, 2006). The Lawrence study (2006) of 232 male-to-female transsexuals all operated on by the same surgeon found the participants to be least satisfied with vaginal lubrication and vaginal touch sensations, although overall level of satisfaction was still high. Regarding psychological adjust- ment, a recent follow-up showed that transsexuals who had sex reassignment surgery were less well-adjusted compared with normal controls (Dhejne et al., 2011). The optimal compari- son, however, is not with normal controls but with transsexuals desiring but not given sex reassignment surgery. In spite of the reasonably good success record for transsexual patients who are carefully chosen, such surgery remains controversial because some professionals continue to maintain that it is inappropri- ate to treat psychological disorders through drastic anatomical changes.  in review  •   Define   paraphilia, and cite six paraphilias recognized in the DSM , along with their associated features.  •   What two components characterize gender dysphoria?  •   Identify the two types of male-to-female transsexuals, and describe their developmental course as well as that of female-to- male transsexuals.  •   What are the most effective treatments for childhood gender dysphoria and adult transsexualism?  Sexual Abuse  Sexual abuse   is sexual contact that involves physical or psycho- logical coercion or at least one individual who cannot reason- ably consent to the contact (e.g., a child). Such abuse includes pedophilia, incest, and rape, and it concerns society much more than any other sexual problem. It is somewhat ironic, then, that of these three forms of abuse, only pedophilia is included in  DSM-5 . This partly reflects the seriousness with which the soci- ety views these offenses and its preference for treating coercive sex offenders as criminals rather than as having a mental disorder (although obviously many criminals also have mental disorders).  Childhood sexual Abuse  The past few decades have seen intense concern about child- hood sexual abuse, with an accompanying increase in relevant research. There are at least three reasons for including some
discussion of this here. First, as noted in previous chapters, there are possible links between childhood sexual abuse and some mental disorders, so such abuse may be important in the etiol- ogy of some disorders (see especially Chapters 3, 5, 8, and 10). Second, much evidence suggests that, broadly defined, child- hood sexual abuse is more common than was once assumed, and it is important to understand some of its causes. Third, some dramatic and well-publicized cases involving allegations of child- hood sexual abuse have raised very controversial issues such as the validity of children’s testimony and the accuracy of recovered memories of sexual abuse. We shall consider all three of these issues in turn.  PReVAlenCe oF CHilDHooD sexuAl ABuse   The preva- lence of childhood sexual abuse depends on its definition, which has varied substantially across studies. For example, different studies use different definitions of “childhood,” with the upper age limit ranging from 12 to as high as 19 years. Some studies have counted any kind of sexual interaction, even that which does not include physical contact (e.g., exhibitionism); others have counted only physical contact; others have counted only genital contact; and still others have counted consensual sexual contact with a minor. A recent review of data from 22 countries estimated that 7.9 percent of men and 19.7 percent of women had suffered sexual abuse prior to age 18. The highest rates were from African countries, and the lowest rates were from Europe; U.S. figures were intermediate. Obviously “prior to age 18” comprises a wide range of ages, and, for example, age 17 is not always viewed as part of childhood.  ConsequenCes oF CHilDHooD sexuAl ABuse   Child- hood sexual abuse may have both short-term and long-term con- sequences. The most common short-term consequences are fears, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), sexual inappropriateness (e.g., touching others’ genitals or talking about sexual acts), and poor self-esteem, but approximately one-third of sexually abused children show no symptoms (e.g., Kendall-Tackett et al., 1993; McConaghy, 1998). Associations between reports of childhood sexual abuse and adult psychopathology have been commonly reported (Maniglio, 2009). Specific examples include borderline personality disor- der (Bandelow et al., 2005; Battle et al., 2004), somatization disorder with dissociative symptoms (Sar et al., 2004), and dis- sociative identity disorder (Maldonado & Spiegel, 2007; Ross, 1999). A wide variety of sexual symptoms have also been alleged to result from early sexual abuse (e.g., Leonard & Follette, 2002; Loeb et al., 2002; see review in Maniglio, 2009), ranging, for example, from sexual aversion to sexual promiscuity. A similar range of negative consequences has also been reported in a sam- ple of about 3,000 male and female adults in China, although the rate of childhood sexual abuse in China is lower than in Western countries (Luo et al., 2008). Unfortunately, as discussed in Chapters 8 and 10, knowledge about these hypothesized associations is very limited because of difficulties in establishing causal links between early experiences and adult behavior (see also “Unresolved Issues”).  ConTRoVeRsies ConCeRning CHilDHooD sexuAl ABuse   Several types of high-profile criminal trials have high- lighted the limitations of our knowledge concerning questions of great scientific and practical importance. In one type of case, children have accused adults working in day care settings of ex- tensive, often bizarre sexual abuse, and controversial issues have been raised about the degree to which children’s accusations can be trusted. In a second type of case, adults claim to have re- pressed and completely forgotten memories of early sexual abuse and then to have “recovered” the memories during adulthood, typically while seeing a therapist who believes that repressed memories of childhood sexual abuse are a very common cause of adult psychopathology. Many controversial issues have been raised about the validity of these “recovered” memories.  Children’s Testimony   Several cases of alleged sexual abuse in day care settings shocked the country starting in the 1980s and continuing into the early 1990s. The most notori- ous was the McMartin Preschool case in California (Eberle & Eberle, 1993). In 1983, Judy Johnson complained to police that her son had been molested by Raymond Buckey, who helped run the McMartin Preschool, which her son attended. Johnson’s complaints grew increasingly bizarre. For example, she accused Buckey of sodomizing her son while he stuck the boy’s head in a toilet and of making him ride naked on a horse. Johnson was later diagnosed with acute paranoid schizophrenia, and she died of alcohol-related liver disease in 1986. By the time she died, pros- ecutors no longer needed her. Children at the preschool who were interviewed began to tell fantastically lurid stories—for example, that they were forced to dig up dead bodies at cemeteries, jump out of airplanes, and kill animals with bats. Nevertheless, prosecu- tors and many McMartin parents believed the children. Buckey and his mother (who owned the day care facility) were tried in a trial that took two and a half years and cost $15 million. The jury acquitted Ms. Buckey on all counts and failed to convict Raymond Buckey on any; however, he was freed only after retrial, after having spent 5 years in jail. The jurors’ principal reason for not finding the defendants guilty was their concern that inter- viewers had used leading questions or coercive methods of ques- tioning. Moreover, subsequent research on children who reported satanic abuse found no evidence (including physical evidence) that such abuse had occurred, and so any such reports of satanic abuse are scientifically very doubtful (London et al., 2005). Despite these concerns, some day care workers accused of satanic sexual abuse have served years in prison. Obviously, investigations of possible child sexual abuse will often depend on the reports and testimony of children. We have noted the tendency in recent times of people to believe children’s reports, no matter how unlikely they seem. Is the confidence in
children’s reports of sexual abuse well-founded? In a very impor- tant series of studies, the psychologists Stephen Ceci and Maggie Bruck have shown that children can easily be led to concoct stories of events that never occurred (Bruck et al., 2002; Ceci et al., 2000, 2007; London et al., 2005). The likelihood of concocting stories increases when interviewers have asked leading questions, repeated questioning, and reinforcing some kinds of answers more than oth- ers. This research shows that failure to proceed with care in interro- gating children can easily lead to false accusations and injustice. In the legal case   U.S. v. Desmond Rouse   (2004), a federal appeals court (i.e., a court just below the U.S. Supreme Court) established new rules for evaluating the admissibility of children’s testimony based almost exclusively on the work of Ceci and Bruck.  Recovered Memories of sexual Abuse   In 1990, a young woman named Eileen Franklin testified in court that she had seen her father rape and murder an 8-year-old playmate 20 years earlier. Remarkably, despite her claim to have witnessed the murder, she had had no memory of the event until she “recovered” the memory by accident in adulthood (MacLean, 1992). Franklin’s father was convicted and given a life sentence, although in 1995 the conviction was overturned because of two serious constitutional errors made during the original trial that might have affected the jury’s verdict. In a different kind of case, Patricia Burgus sued her two psychiatrists in Chicago for false- memory implantation, claiming the doctors had persuaded her through hypnosis and other therapeutic techniques “to believe that she was a member of a satanic cult, that she was sexually abused by multiple men, and that she engaged in cannibalism and abused her own children” (Brown et al., 2000, p. 3). In 1997 she was awarded $10.6 million. As discussed in some detail in Chapter 8, whether traumatic experiences can be utterly forgotten and then somehow recovered intact years later has been heatedly debated over the past several decades. Some have argued that repressed memories are com- mon (e.g., Herman, 1993) and are responsible for a great deal of psychopathology. In the controversial but very popular book   The Courage to Heal , journalists Ellen Bass and Laura Davis assert, “If you are unable to remember any specific instances [of sexual abuse] . . . but still have the feeling that something abusive happened to you, it probably did” (1988, p. 21). Yet as researchers have pointed out, there is absolutely no evidence that this statement is true. Some therapists still routinely give this book to their clients, and those clients often do report “recovering” such memories. Those skeptical about recovery of repressed memories point out that even normal, unrepressed memories can be highly inaccurate and that false memories can be induced experimentally (Davis & Loftus, 2009; Loftus et al., 1995) (see Chapter 8). The debate about the validity of memories of childhood sexual abuse that arise during therapy remains extremely heated. Some researchers (the nonbe- lievers) maintain that the concept of repressed memory is wholly or largely invalid. In their view, virtually all “recovered memories” are false (Crews, 1995; Davis & Loftus, 2009; Thomas & Loftus, 2002). Others (the believers) maintain that false memories rarely occur and that recovered memories are typically valid. Still others believe that valid recovered memories are simply the remembering of events forgotten because, at the time, they were not traumatic (McNally & Geraerts, 2009). Psychologists equally familiar with the evidence have argued bitterly about this issue, and, as discussed in more detail in Chapter 8, a task force assembled by the Ameri- can Psychological Association to study the issue in the mid-1990s failed to reach a consensus, although an online guide urges caution (“Questions and answers about childhood sexual abuse,” 2013). Indeed, the debate concerning recovered memories of sexual abuse is one of the most important and interesting contemporary con- troversies in the domains of psychopathology and mental health, as discussed in the Unresolved Issues section in Chapter 8. Despite the continuing controversy among scientists, cases of recovered memories of sexual abuse appear to have become much rarer. A survey conducted of the False Memory Syndrome Foundation— largely parents who say they have been accused by their children of sexual abuse based on recovered memories—showed that accusa- tions peaked in 1991 and 1992, with 579 made during that time. In 1999 and 2000 only 36 accusations were made (McHugh & Kreek, 2004).  Pedophilic Disorder  According to   DSM-5 ,   pedophilic disorder —a paraphilic disor- der not discussed earlier—is diagnosed when an adult has recur- rent, intense sexual urges or fantasies about sexual activity with a prepubertal child; acting on these desires is not necessary for the diagnosis if they cause the pedophile distress (see “ DSM-5  Criteria” on p. 410).   DSM-5   retains the wording of   DSM-IV-TR , that a child is understood to be “generally age 13 or younger.” In doing so, the   DSM-5   rejected two potentially important sug- gestions from the   DSM-5   subcommittee on paraphilias: first,  Evidence has suggested that the use of anatomically correct dolls to question young children about where they may have been touched in alleged incidents of sexual abuse does not improve the accuracy of their testimony relative to verbal interviews alone.
that pedophilia be diagnosed according to the degree of physical maturity of the child (as rated by Tanner scores, which index degree of pubertal maturation), and second, that diagnostic criteria for pedophilia (attraction to prepubescent children) be changed to include men with hebephilia (attraction to pubescent children—children in the early stages of puberty). The debate over these proposals was heated, and the issues are interesting. We believe that   DSM-5   should have made the changes. Read the Thinking Critically About   DSM-5   to see if you agree. Pedophiles’ sexual interaction with children frequently involves manual or oral contact with a child’s genitals; penetra- tive anal or vaginal sex is much rarer. Although penetration and associated force are often injurious to the child, injuries are usu- ally a byproduct rather than the goal they would be with a sadist (although a minority of men diagnosed with pedophilic disorder are also sexual sadists; Cohen & Galynker, 2002). Nearly all individuals with pedophilia are male, and about two-thirds of pedophilic offenders’ victims are girls, typically between the ages of 8 and 11 (Cohen & Galynker, 2002). Most pedophiles prefer girls, but perhaps one in four prefers boys. The rate of homosexuality among pedophiles is much higher than the analogous rate among normal adult- attracted men (Seto, 2008). Although some social conserva- tives have argued that this shows that gay men tend to commit pedophilic acts, this is an incorrect inference. Gay men are no more interested in male children than heterosexual men are in female children. Homosexual pedophilia is an entirely different erotic preference from normal male homosexuality (Herek, 2009). Homosexual pedophilic sex offenders tend to have more victims than heterosexual pedophilic sex offenders (Blanchard et al., 2000; Cohen & Galynker, 2002). One sur- vey of pedophiles found that a majority have used childhood pornography (Seto, 2004). Studies investigating the sexual responses of men with pedophilia have revealed several patterns of results (Barbaree & Seto, 1997; Seto et al., 2006). Such studies typically use a   penile  P edophilia has been understood and defined as attraction to prepubertal children, that is, children without any signs of puberty (e.g., no pubic hair, breast growth, or penis growth). However, studies of sex offenders, both of victim char- acteristics and of offender sexual arousal patterns, have unequiv- ocably demonstrated the existence of a subgroup who are most aroused not to prepubescent children, but to pubescent children (children in the early stages of puberty). Scientists have called such men   hebephiles . Pubescent children are not fully sexu- ally mature, despite showing some signs of pubertal develop- ment. Pedophilia and hebephilia appear to be closely related, because it is not uncommon for pedophiles also to be attracted to pubescent children and hebephiles to prepubescent children. The   DSM-5   paraphilias subcommittee proposed that the defini- tion of pedophilia be expanded to include attraction to pubes- cent children. (That is, the proposal was that   DSM-5   pedophilia would now include hebephilia as well as   DSM-IV-TR   pedophilia.) Furthermore, instead of diagnosing pedophilia based on the age of children to whom a man is sexually attracted (i.e., 13 years old and younger), the committee proposed that diagnosis be made based on the physical maturity of the children. They proposed that this be done on the basis of well-known developmental markers. (These markers, called Tanner scores, represent the degree of pubertal maturation and range from “none” to “com- pleted.”) This would be more diagnostically accurate than rely- ing on children’s ages because children mature at variable rates. A 12-year-old girl might be prepubescent, but in this day and age she is more likely to be pubescent because most girls in the United States have begun puberty by that age (Razzak, 2012). In   DSM-IV-TR , which relied on child victims’ ages, a diagnosis of pedophilia would be likely regardless of the girl’s level of physi- cal maturity. But the   DSM-IV-TR   diagnostic criteria for pedophilia defined it as sexual attraction to prepubescent children. Thus,  DSM-IV-TR   diagnostic criteria for pedophilia often led to techni- cally inaccurate diagnoses. Using physical maturity rather than age of desired children to diagnose pedophilia would require that clinicians think correctly about the meaning of pedophilia. The proposed changes proved highly controversial because of the proposed expansion of pedophilia to include attraction to pubes- cent children. Opponents of its inclusion asserted that attraction to pubescent girls is characteristic of normal men (e.g., Rind & Yuill, 2012; Wakefield, 2012). The idea that normal men are at- tracted to pubescent children is largely mistaken, and represents a failure to appreciate the physical immaturity of children in the early stages of puberty, compared with children or adolescents who have completed puberty. In the end, the   DSM-5   rejected both the expansion of the definition of pedophilia to include at- traction to pubescent children and diagnosing pedophilia on the basis of desired children’s degree of sexual maturity (focusing on developmental markers of prepubescence and pubescence). Instead,   DSM-5   retains the internally contradictory criteria of  DSM-IV-TR , namely that pedophilia is attraction to prepubescent children, and that prepubescence is understood as “younger than age 13” even though many of such children are not prepu- bescent. Many people working in the area are not pleased that  DSM-5   did not make the proposed changes. What do you think?  Thinking CriTiCally about DSM-5  Pedophilia and Hebephilia   DSM- 5
plethysmograph   to measure erectile responses to sexual stimuli directly rather than relying on self-report. (A plethysmograph consists of an expandable band placed around the penis that is connected to a recording device.) Men with pedophilia typi- cally show greater sexual arousal than matched nonoffenders in response to pictures of nude or partially clad girls—and greater arousal to such pictures than to pictures of adult women. But some men with pedophilia respond to children as well as to ado- lescents and/or adults (Seto, 2004; Seto et al., 1999). Child molesters are more likely than nonoffenders to engage in self-justifying cognitive distortions, including the beliefs that children will benefit from sexual contact with adults and that children often initiate such contact (Marziano et al., 2006). Moti- vationally, many pedophilic child molesters appear to be shy and introverted yet still desire mastery or dominance over another indi- vidual. Some also idealize aspects of childhood such as innocence, unconditional love, or simplicity (Cohen & Galynker, 2002). Pedophilia usually is first recognized in adolescence and per- sists over a person’s life. Many pedophiles engage in work with children or youth so that they have extensive access to children. Some pedophiles never act on their preferences, but many do. It is currently impossible to estimate the proportion of men with pedophilia who remain child-celibate. Several studies show that adolescent and adult men with pedophilia are much more likely to have been sexually or physically abused as children than are rapists of adults (Daversa & Knight, 2007; Lee & Katzman, 2002). The meaning of this association remains unclear. Recent research findings also support the importance of sev- eral neurobiological influences on pedophilia. Compared with non-pedophilic sex offenders, men with pedophilia have lower IQs (Cantor, Blanchard et al., 2005; Seto, 2004), threefold higher rates of non-right-handedness (Cantor, Klassen et al., 2005; Seto, 2004), higher rates of head injuries resulting in loss of consciousness, and differences in brain structure detected by brain-imaging techniques, at least some of which are critical for normal sexual development (Cantor et al., 2008; Schiltz et al., 2007). All these findings point to pedophilia involving certain perturbations of early neurodevel- opment that may create a vulnerability to the disorder. For several decades we have seen an increasing number of cases of child molestation among a group long considered to be highly trustworthy: the Catholic clergy. Although the major- ity of priests are innocent of sexual wrongdoing, the Catholic Church has been repeatedly forced to admit that a significant minority have sexually abused children. In a large study of the problem, 81 percent of complainants against Catholic clergy were male, and more than 40 percent of cases involved children aged 12 or younger when the alleged abuse began (John Jay College of Criminal Justice, 2004). At least 400 priests were charged with sexual abuse during the 1980s, and $400 mil- lion was paid in damages between 1985 and the early 1990s (Samborn, 1994). One very serious scandal involved James R. Porter, a 57-year-old father of four who was alleged to have sexually abused as many as 100 children when he was a priest in Massachusetts during the 1960s. (Complicating the case, some but not all of the accusations against him were based upon recovered memories.) Porter later admitted to some of his offenses and was convicted. The Church settled a multimillion- dollar suit with 25 men whom Porter was convicted of abusing. Scandal in the Catholic Church erupted anew in 2002, with heightened publicity regarding revelations that not only had a substantial number of priests in many cities been sexually involved with children and adolescents, but a significant number had also been protected by their superiors. Indeed, this scandal led, after a prolonged public outcry, to the resignation of Cardi- nal Bernard Law of the Archdiocese of Boston. Over many years, Law had protected numerous priests who were guilty of sexual misconduct, allowing them to move from one parish to another after their sexual misconduct was discovered. Thus he allowed their sexual molestation to continue with more and more girls and boys. The Conference of Bishops subsequently adopted a policy of mandatory removal of any priest from his ministerial duties if he is known to have had sexual contact with a minor. This new policy seems to be working at least to some extent. In September 2005, for example, Cardinal Francis George of the Archdiocese of Chicago permanently removed 11 priests from public ministerial duties for reasons of sexual misconduct ( Chicago Tribune , September 27, 2005). New cases continue to emerge, and there is no particular reason to expect they will stop anytime soon. Similar problems of priests engaging in abuse have also occurred in Ireland (LeVay & Baldwin, 2012).  Former priest John Geoghan was found guilty of sexually molesting two boys and accused of sexually molesting dozens more in several parishes in the Boston area.
Not all men with pedophilia molest children. In a confi- dential study of German men who sought mental health services because of their pedophilic feelings, 30 percent reported that they had never had sexual contact with a child. Most of those, however, had viewed child pornography (Neutze et al., 2011). The organization B4UAct (Before You Act) is intended to support law-abiding men with pedophilic feelings and to raise awareness that such men exist and suffer due to societal prejudice (Clarke-Flory, 2012). Another organization called Virtuous Pedophiles is intended to reduce stigma toward law- abiding pedophiles by raising consciousness about their existence (Clarke-Flory, 2012).  incest  Culturally prohibited sexual relations (up to and including coitus) between family members such as a brother and sister or a parent and child are known as   incest . Although a few societies have sanctioned certain incestuous relationships—at one time it was the established practice for Egyptian pharaohs to marry their sisters to prevent the royal blood from being “contaminated”—the incest taboo is virtually universal among human societies. Incest often produces children with mental and physical problems because close genetic relatives are much more likely than nonrelatives to share the same recessive genes (which often have negative biological effects) and hence to pro- duce children with two sets of recessive genes. Presumably for this reason, many nonhuman animal species, and all known pri- mates, have an evolved tendency to avoid matings between close relatives. The mechanism for human incest avoidance appears to be lack of sexual interest in people to whom one is continuously exposed from an early age. For example, biologically unrelated children who are raised together in Israeli kibbutzim rarely marry or have affairs with others from their rearing group when they become adults (Kenrick & Luce, 2004). Evolutionarily, this makes sense. In most cultures, children reared together are biologically related. In our own society, the actual incidence of incest is difficult to estimate because it usually comes to light only when reported to law enforcement or other agencies. It is almost certainly more common than is generally believed, in part because many victims are reluctant to report the incest or do not consider themselves victimized. Brother–sister incest is the most common form of incest even though it is rarely reported (LeVay & Baldwin, 2012). The second most common pattern is father–daughter incest. It seems that girls living with stepfathers are at especially high risk for incest, perhaps because there is less of an incest taboo among nonblood relatives (Finkelhor, 1984; Masters et al., 1992). Mother–son incest is thought to be relatively rare. Fre- quently, incest offenders do not stop with one child in a family (Wilson, 2004), and some incestuous fathers involve all of their daughters serially as they become pubescent. Some incestuous child molesters have pedophilic arousal patterns (Barsetti et al., 1998; Seto et al., 1999), suggesting that they are at least partly motivated by sexual attraction to children, although they also show arousal to adult women. However, they differ from extrafamilial child molesters in at least two respects (Quinsey et al., 1995). First, the large majority of incest offenses are against girls, whereas extrafamilial offenses show a more equal distribution between boys and girls. Second, incest offend- ers are more likely to offend with only one or a few children in the family, whereas pedophilic child molesters are likely to have more victims (LeVay & Baldwin, 2012). In 2007 the world was shocked at revelations concerning the case of an Austrian incest perpetrator named Josef Fritzl. Years earlier Fritzl had kidnapped his own daughter Elisabeth when she was 18 and incarcerated her in a soundproof compartment he had built in his own basement. He forced her to write a note saying that she had joined a cult and that she wanted no further contact with the family. She lived there for 24 years without the knowledge of her mother and other family members who lived upstairs. During her long incarceration, her father repeatedly forced her to have sex. During those years she bore seven chil- dren (one of whom died in infancy). Three of the children were reared by the family upstairs, ostensibly having been left for the family by Elisabeth. The other three lived in the basement with her. It was due to a medical problem in one of the latter children that the ordeal finally ended. She begged Josef to let her take the child to the hospital, and he agreed. Hospital staff thought the Fritzls’ cover story to be suspicious and alerted police, who suc- cessfully investigated (Dahlkamp et al., 2008).  Rape  The term   rape   describes sexual activity that occurs under actual or threatened forcible coercion of one person by another (see Figure 12.1). In most states, legal definitions restrict forcible rape to forced intercourse or penetration of a bodily orifice by a penis or other object.   Statutory rape   is sexual activity with a person who is legally defined (by statute or law) to be under the age of consent (18 in most states) even if the underage person consents. In the vast majority of cases, rape is a crime of men against women, although in prison settings it is often committed by men against men. It is important to note that forced sex is not unique to humans but rather occurs in many species in the animal king- dom, where it has often evolved as a reproductive strategy by males to produce more offspring. It has also existed in most human societies (including preliterate ones) at some time in his- tory (Lalumière et al., 2005a). Across history, rape is tradition- ally most frequent during and following wars, when it sometimes reaches epidemic proportions. This may be because during war, men perceive few costs for the offense and it is perceived as a good way to express antagonism and contempt toward the enemy (Lalumière et al., 2005a).  PReVAlenCe   The results of different studies estimating the prevalence of rape have varied widely. This is, at least in part, be- cause of differences across studies in the precise definition of rape
and the way information is gathered (direct or indirect questions, for example). For instance, the U.S. Department of Justice figures from 1998 estimated that one in three women would experience rape or attempted rape at some point in their lives, with many of these being attempted but not completed rapes; but other esti- mates have been substantially lower. Marital rape is now illegal in all 50 states in the United States and is estimated to occur in 10 to 14 percent of married women and 40 to 50 percent of battered women (Martin et al., 2007). Since the late 1970s, the prevalence of rape has diminished dramatically, from nearly 3 to fewer than 0.5 per 1,000 individuals per year (Bureau of Justice, 2011).  is RAPe MoTiVATeD By sex oR AggRession?   Tradition- ally, rape has been classified as a sex crime, and society has as- sumed that a rapist is motivated by lust. However, in the 1970s some feminist scholars began to challenge this view, arguing that rape is motivated by the need to dominate, to assert power, and to humiliate a victim rather than by sexual desire for her (e.g., Brownmiller, 1975). Certainly from the perspective of the vic- tim, rape—which is among women’s greatest fears—is always an act of violence and is certainly not a sexually pleasurable experi- ence, whatever the rapist’s motivation. In spite of the fact that feminist writers have argued that rape is primarily a violent act, there are many compelling reasons why sexual motivation is often, if not always, a very important factor too (e.g., Bryden & Grier, 2011; Ellis, 1989; Thornhill & Palmer, 2000). For example, although rape victims include females of all degrees of physical attractiveness, the age distri- bution of rape victims is not at all random but includes a very high proportion of women in their teens and early 20s, who are generally considered the most sexually attractive. This age dis- tribution is quite different from the distribution of other violent crimes, in which the elderly are overrepresented because of their vulnerability. Furthermore, rapists usually cite sexual motivation as a very important cause of their actions. Finally, as we shall see, at least some rapists exhibit features associated with paraphilias and have multiple paraphilias (Abel & Rouleau, 1990; LeVay & Baldwin, 2012). Men with paraphilias are typically highly sexu- ally motivated. In the past few decades, several prominent researchers studying sex offenders have shown that all rapists actually have both aggressive and sexual motives but to varying degrees. For example, Knight and Prentky (1990) identified four subtypes of rapists, with two subtypes motivated primarily by aggression and two subtypes motivated primarily by distorted sexual motives (see also Knight et al., 1994). More recently, McCabe and Wauchope (2005) provided empirical support for a somewhat different clas- sification system that also has four subtypes of rapists with differ- ing amounts of sexual and aggressive motives. At present it is not clear which scheme of classification is best, and some rapists can- not readily be characterized (LeVay & Baldwin, 2012).  RAPe AnD iTs AFTeRMATH   Stranger rape tends to be a re- petitive activity rather than an isolated act, and most rapes are planned events. About 80 percent of rapists commit the act in the neighborhoods in which they reside; most rapes occur in an urban setting at night, in places ranging from dark, lonely streets to elevators and hallways, and apartments or homes. About a third or more of all rapes involve more than one offender. The remainder are single-offender rapes in which the victim and the offender are acquainted with each other (in about two-thirds of rapes); this includes wives (Bennice & Resick, 2003) (see Figure 12.2). In addition to the physical trauma inflicted on a victim, the psychological trauma may be severe, leading in a substantial number of female victims to PTSD (see Chapter 5), which, when caused by rape, is often also associated with severe sexual problems. A rape may also have a negative impact on a victim’s  12–15   16–19   20–24   25–34   35–49   65 and over 50–64  Females raped or sexually assaulted annually, per 1000  8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0  Age  figure   12.1  Age of Rape and sexual Assault Victims.   Young women are most at risk.  Source: Data from U.S. Department of Justice, 2002.
marriage or other intimate relationships. Although there has been little systematic study of men who have been raped, one study of 40 male rape victims revealed that nearly all experienced some long-term psychological distress following rape, including anxiety, depression, increased feelings of anger, and loss of self- image (Walker et al., 2005). Rape, even at its least violent, is a bullying, intrusive violation of another person’s integrity, selfhood, and personal boundaries that deserves to be viewed with more gravity—and its victims with more compassion and sensitivity—than has often been the case. Nevertheless, the myth of “victim-precipitated” rape, once a favorite of defense attorneys and of some police and court juris- dictions, still remains in certain circles. According to this view, a victim (especially a repeat victim), though often bruised both psy- chologically and physically, is regarded as the cause of the crime, often on such grounds as the alleged provocativeness of her cloth- ing, her past sexual behavior, or her presence in a location consid- ered risky (LeVay & Baldwin, 2012; Stermac et al., 1990). The attacker, on the other hand, is regarded as unable to quell his lust in the face of such irresistible provocation—and therefore is not treated as legally responsible for the act. Fortunately,   rape shield laws   began to be introduced in the 1970s. These laws protect rape victims by, for example, preventing the prosecutor from using evidence of a victim’s prior sex history; however, many problems in these laws still remain (LeVay & Baldwin, 2012). A recent example of the complexity inherent in the legal situation of rape prosecution is that of Dominique Strauss-Kahn (DSK), who was managing director of the International Mon- etary Fund and an aspiring French politician. In May 2011, he was accused by a New York City hotel worker of sexually assault- ing her when she entered his hotel room to clean it. A police investigation confirmed that sexual contact had occurred, but DSK insisted that it was consensual. Subsequently another woman came forward accusing him of raping her years earlier in France. However, the 2011 case unraveled when prosecutors learned that DSK’s accuser had lied about other matters, including the claim that she had been raped in her country of origin. The charges were dropped. It is possible that DSK got away with rape. It is also possible that he was falsely accused. Cases such as the accusations against DSK highlight both barriers to prosecuting rape cases and the need for adequate protections for the accused.  RAPisTs AnD CAusAl ConsiDeRATions   Information gathered by the FBI about arrested and convicted rapists suggests that rape is usually a young man’s crime. According to FBI Uni- form Crime Reports, about 60 percent of all rapists arrested are under 25 years old. Of the rapists who get into police records, about 30 to 50 percent are married and living with their wives at the time of the crime. As a group, they come from the low end of the socioeconomic ladder and commonly have a prior criminal record (Ward et al., 1997). They are also quite likely to have experienced sexual abuse, a violent home environment, and inconsistent caregiving in childhood (Hudson & Ward, 1997). One subset of rapists, date rapists (a date rapist is an acquaintance who rapes a woman in the context of a date or other social interaction), have a somewhat different demographic profile in that they are often middle- to upper-class young men who rarely have criminal records. However, these men, like incarcerated rapists, are characterized by promiscuity, hostile masculinity, and an emotionally detached, predatory personality (e.g., Knight, 1997; LeVay & Baldwin, 2012). Their victims are often highly intoxicated (Mohler-Kuo et al., 2004; Testa et al., 2003). What distinguishes them, primarily, is that incarcerated rapists show much higher levels of impulsive, antisocial behavior than date rapists. As suggested earlier, there is evidence that some rapists are afflicted by a paraphilia (Abel & Rouleau, 1990; Freund & Seto, 1998). For example, rapists often report having recurrent, repeti- tive, and compulsive urges to rape. Although they typically try to control these urges, the urges sometimes become so strong that they act on them. Many rapists also have other paraphilias such as exhibitionism and voyeurism. They also frequently have a characteristic pattern of sexual arousal (Abel & Rouleau, 1990; Clegg & Fremouw, 2009; Lohr et al., 1997). Most rapists are similar to normal, nonoffending men in being sexually aroused by depictions of mutually satisfying, consensual intercourse, but many rapists are also sexually aroused by depictions of sexual assaults involving an unwilling victim (Clegg & Fremouw, 2009; Lalumière et al., 2005b). A small minority of rapists are sexual sadists, characterized by very violent assaults and aroused more by assault than by sexual stimuli. In terms of personality, rapists are very often characterized by impulsivity, quick loss of temper, lack of personally inti- mate relationships, and insensitivity to social cues or pressures  Stranger  30%  Friend/acquaintance  46%  Intimate partner 20% Other relative 3%   Relationship unknown 1%  figure   12.2  Most Rapes Are not Committed by strangers.   The graph shows the relationships of perpetrators of rape and sexual assault to their victims.  Source: Data from U.S. Department of Justice, 2002.
(Giotakos et al., 2004), and a subset qualify for a diagnosis of psychopathy (e.g., Knight & Guay, 2006). Many rapists also show some deficits in social and communication skills (Emmers- Sommer et al., 2004), as well as in their cognitive appraisals of women’s feelings and intentions (Ward et al., 1997). For exam- ple, they are particularly deficient in skills involved in successful conversation, which is necessary for developing consenting rela- tionships with women. In addition, they have difficulty decod- ing women’s negative cues during social interactions and often interpret friendly behavior as flirtatious or sexually provocative (Emmers-Sommer et al., 2004). This can lead to inappropriate behaviors that women would experience as sexually intrusive. Estimates are that only 20 to 28 percent of rapes are ever reported, compared to 60 percent of robberies, but the propor- tion of rapes being reported has increased over the past several decades (Magid et al., 2004). Among men who are arrested, only about half are convicted; of these, only about two-thirds serve a jail term (LeVay & Baldwin, 2012). Convictions often bring light sentences, and a jail term does not dissuade a sub- stantial number of offenders from repeating their crimes. Con- sequently, the large majority of rapists are not in prison but out among us.  Treatment and Recidivism of sex offenders  For several decades in the United States there has been extreme concern about, and intolerance of, sex offenders who repeat their crimes. Soon after his release from prison, convicted sex offender Earl Shriner forced a 7-year-old boy off his bike in the woods near Tacoma, Washington, and then raped and stabbed him before cutting off the boy’s penis. Just before his release from prison, Shriner had confided to a cellmate that he still had fan- tasies of molesting and murdering children (Popkin, 1994). In a similar case, 7-year-old Megan Kanka was sexually molested and murdered by a convicted child molester living in her neighbor- hood. Cases such as these have inspired a number of measures to protect society from sexual predators (see “The World Around Us” box). But are such stories representative? Are sex offenders typi- cally incurable? Should they receive life sentences on the pre- sumption that they are bound to offend again? Or have they been unfairly singled out by media sensationalism even though they really are responsive to treatment? The efficacy of treatment for sex offenders is controversial, and this is the topic to which we now turn (e.g., Fedoroff, 2009). In general, sex offender recidivism is actually markedly lower than for many other kinds of crimes. Recidivism rates for some types of offenders are higher than they are for others, however (Mann et al., 2010). Specifically, sex offenders with deviant sexual preferences (e.g., exhibitionists, severe sadists, and those who are most attracted to children) have particularly high rates of sexual recidivism (Dickey et al., 2002; Langevin et al., 2004). One follow-up study of more than 300 sex offend- ers over 25 years found that over half were charged with at least one additional sexual offense (Langevin et al., 2004). A recent review found that sexualized violence—a preference for sadistic or coercive sex—was the strongest predictor of recidivism. Other predictors included negative social influences, poor cognitive problem-solving, and loneliness (Mann et al., 2010). The recidi- vism rate for rapists steadily decreases with age, as does perfor- mance of sexually deviant behavior more generally (Barbaree & Blanchard, 2008).  PsyCHoTHeRAPies AnD THeiR eFFeCTiVeness   Therapies for sex offenders typically have at least one of the following four goals: to modify patterns of sexual arousal and attraction, to mod- ify cognitions and social skills in order to allow more appropriate sexual interactions with adult partners, to change habits or behav- ior that increases the chance of reoffending, or to reduce sexual drive. Attempts to modify sexual arousal patterns usually involve  aversion therapy , in which a paraphilic stimulus such as a slide of  Which scenario do you think is more likely to lead to rape? It is difficult to guess because date rape is increasingly common, and rapes by casual acquain- tances usually occur in dark, lonely places.
a nude prepubescent girl for a man with pedophilia is paired with an aversive event such as forced inhalation of noxious odors or a shock to the arm. An alternative to electric aversion therapy is  covert sensitization , in which the patient imagines a highly aversive event while viewing or imagining a paraphilic stimulus, or   assisted covert sensitization , in which a foul odor is introduced to induce nausea at the point of peak arousal (Beech & Harkins, 2012). Deviant arousal patterns also need to be replaced by arousal to acceptable stimuli (Maletzky, 2002; Quinsey & Earls, 1990). Most often, investigators have attempted to pair the pleasurable stimuli of orgasm with sexual fantasies involving sex between con- senting adults. For example, sex offenders are asked to masturbate while thinking of deviant fantasies. At the moment of ejaculatory inevitability, the patient switches his fantasy to a more appropriate theme. Although aversion therapy has been shown to be somewhat effective in the laboratory (Maletzky, 1998; Quinsey & Earls, 1990), how well this therapeutic change generalizes to the patient’s outside world is uncertain if his motivation wanes. Further, although aversion therapy is still widely used for sex offenders, it is no longer used as a sole form of treatment (Marshall, 1998). The remaining psychological treatments are aimed at reducing the chances of sexual reoffending.   Cognitive restructuring   attempts to eliminate sex offenders’ cognitive distortions because these may play a role in sexual abuse (Maletzky, 2002). For example, an incest offender who main- tained that “If my ten-year-old daughter had said no, I would have stopped” might be challenged about a number of implied distortions: that a child has the capacity to consent to have sex with an adult; that if a child does not say no, she has con- sented; and that it is the child’s responsibility to stop sexual contact. In addition,   social-skills training   aims to help sex offenders (especially rapists) learn to process social informa- tion from women more effectively and to interact with them more appropriately (Beech & Harkins, 2012; Maletzky, 2002; McFall, 1990). For example, some men read positive sexual connotations into women’s neutral or negative messages or believe that women’s refusals of sexual advances reflect “playing hard to get.” Training typically involves interaction of perpe- trators with female partners, who can give the offenders feed- back on their response to the interactions. Although some studies in the treatment literature have reached positive conclusions (see Maletzsky, 2002, for a review), other studies have found essentially no differences between treated and untreated offenders (Emmelkamp, 1994; Rice et al.,  the WOrlD around us  Megan’s Law  O n July 29, 1994, 7-year-old Megan Kanka, from Hamil- ton Township, New Jersey, was walking home from her friend’s house when a neighbor invited her to his house to see his new puppy. The neighbor, Jesse Timmendequas, 33, was a landscaper who had lived across the street for about a year. Unknown to Megan, to Megan’s parents, or to anyone else in the neighborhood, he was also a twice-convicted child mo- lester (who lived with two other convicted sex offenders). When Megan followed him inside, he led her to an upstairs bedroom, strangled her unconscious with his belt, raped her, and asphyxi- ated her with a plastic bag. Timmendequas then placed Megan’s body in a toolbox, drove to a soccer field, and dumped it near a portable toilet. Timmendequas was subsequently apprehended, convicted, and sentenced to death; however, because New Jer- sey abolished the death penalty in 2007, he will serve a life term in prison. Megan’s murder sparked outrage at the fact that dangerous sex offenders could move into a neighborhood without notifying the community of their presence. In response, the New Jersey state legislature passed Megan’s Law, which mandates that upon release, convicted sex offenders register with police and that authorities notify neighbors that convicted sex offenders have moved in by distributing fliers, alerting local organizations, and canvassing door-to-door. Similar laws have been passed in many other states, and it is now possible in several states to visit a web- site containing pictures and addresses of convicted sex offenders, subject to that state’s Megan’s Law. Although Megan’s Laws have been enormously popular with state legislators and citizens, they have not been uncontroversial. Civil libertarians have objected to community notification requirements, which, they argue, endan- ger released offenders (who have arguably paid their debts to society) and also prevent them from integrating successfully back into society. Although the various Megan’s Laws are intended to protect potential victims rather than to encourage harassment of sex offenders, the latter has occurred, with up to one-third to one-half of registered offenders in some states experienc- ing one or more of the following: loss of a job or home, threats, harassment, property damage, and/or harm to family members (Levenson et al., 2007). In addition, the limited amount of relevant data has brought the effectiveness of Megan’s Laws into ques- tion. For example, since 1995 a number of studies have compared recidivism rates from the period before which registration as a sex offender was required to rates after these laws were passed. Unfortunately, the results have not really provided any reassuring evidence that notifying communities has enhanced community safety (Levenson et al., 2007). A recent analysis in New Jersey, where Megan Kanka lived and died, found that Megan’s Law had made no difference (Zgoba & Levenson, 2008).
1991). A recent meta-analysis of 23 recidivism outcome studies revealed an advantage for treatment: 10.9 percent of treated sex offenders versus 19.2 percent of untreated offenders commit- ted another sex crime (Hanson et al., 2009). The most effective treatment programs followed the Canadian “Risk-Need-Respon- siveness” model, in which an offender’s risk is first assessed to determine who should get the most intensive treatment. Second, there is a focus on factors that directly increase chance of reof- fending such as paraphilic desire or impulsivity. Third, correc- tional programs should be matched to offender characteristics such as learning style, level of motivation, and the offender’s individual characteristics. Such multifaceted cognitive-behavioral techniques appear to be more effective than older techniques such as aversion therapy. There are also indications in the lit- erature that certain paraphilias respond better to treatment than others (Laws & O’Donohue, 2008). For example, one very long- term follow-up (5 to 15 years) of over 2,000 sex offenders who had entered a cognitive-behavioral treatment program found that non-pedophilic child molesters and exhibitionists achieved better overall success rates than pedophilic offenders and rapists (Maletzky & Steinhauser, 2002).  BiologiCAl AnD suRgiCAl TReATMenTs   In recent years antidepressants from the SSRI (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor) category have been found to be useful in treating a variety of paraphilias by reducing paraphilic desire and behavior; they are not, however, useful in the treatment of sexual offend- ers. The most controversial treatment for sex offenders involves castration—either surgical removal of the testes or the hormonal treatment sometimes called “chemical castration” (e.g., Berlin, 2003; Bradford & Greenberg, 1996; Weinberger et al., 2005). Both surgical and chemical castration lower the testosterone level, which in turn lowers the sex drive, allowing the offender to resist any inappropriate impulses. Chemical castration has most often involved the administration of antiandrogen steroid hor- mones such as Depo-Provera and Lupron, which can both have serious side effects. One uncontrolled study of the drug Lupron yielded dramatic results: Thirty men with paraphilias reported an average of 48 deviant fantasies per week prior to therapy, and no such fantasies during treatment (Rosler & Witztum, 1998; see also Maletzky & Field, 2003). However, relapse rates upon discontinuation of the drug were very high (Maletzky, 2002). Studies of surgical castration of repeat sex offenders with violent tendencies conducted in Europe and more recently in the United States had similar results (but without high rates of relapse; Weinberger et al., 2005). These studies have typically included diverse categories of offenders, from child molesters to rapists of adult women. Follow-up has sometimes exceeded 10 years. Recidivism rates for castrated offenders are typically less than 3 percent, compared with greater than 50 percent for uncastrated offenders (e.g., Berlin, 1994; Green, 1992; Prentky, 1997). Despite the apparently high success rates, many feel that the treatment is brutal, unethical, and dehumanizing (Farkas & Stichman, 2002; Gunn, 1993), although this assumption has been challenged (Bailey & Greenberg, 1998). Interestingly, some recent cases have involved a request by the sex offender himself to be castrated in exchange for a lighter sentence (LeVay & Baldwin, 2012). In some states such as California, a repeat offender’s eligibility for probation or parole following childhood molestation is linked to his acceptance of mandated hormonal therapy (Scott & Holmberg, 2003). Ore- gon evaluated the success of requiring such treatment and found that those receiving chemical castration fared better in terms of committing fewer new offenses and fewer parole violations, and were less likely to return to prison (Maletzky et al., 2006). Nev- ertheless, civil libertarians, exemplified by the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), have argued that because of potentially severe side effects, such requirements violate the Constitution’s ban on cruel and unusual punishment. More research is desirable to determine whether, and under what conditions, such biologi- cal treatments should be used with some sex offenders (Rice & Harris, 2011). Such research should be a priority.  CoMBining PsyCHologiCAl AnD BiologiCAl TReAT- MenTs   Not surprisingly, many treatment programs now use a combination of hormone therapy and cognitive-behavioral treatments, the hope being that the hormone treatment can be tapered off after the offender has learned techniques for impulse control (Maletzky, 2002). However, the single most important defect of nearly all available studies is the lack of randomly as- signed controls who are equally motivated for treatment. Some have argued that denying treatment to sex offenders is unethi- cal (e.g., Marshall et al., 1991). However, this would be true only if the treatment were effective, and it is not clear at this point whether it is. Thus others have argued that randomized controlled trials are crucial for making progress in his area (e.g., Seto et al., 2008). Research in this area is further complicated by the fact that the outcome variable in most studies is whether the man is convicted for another sex offense during the follow- up period. The fact that most sex offenses go unpunished (the offender is often never even caught, let alone convicted) might exaggerate the apparent effectiveness of treatment and underesti- mate the dangerousness of sex offenders. Given the social impor- tance of determining whether sex offenders can be helped and how likely they are to reoffend, it is crucial that society devote the resources necessary to answering these questions.  suMMARy   It is possible both to acknowledge that sex of- fenders cause immense human suffering and to feel sympathy for the plight of the many offenders who have been burdened with a deviant sexual arousal pattern that has caused them great personal and legal trouble. Society cannot allow these people to act on their sexual preference, nor can their past crimes be for- gotten. Nevertheless, in deciding how to treat these people, it is important and humane to remember that many of them have a tormented inner life.
in review  •   What are the short-term consequences of childhood sexual abuse, and why are we less certain about its long-term consequences?  •   What are the major issues surrounding children’s testimony about sexual abuse and adults’ recovered memories of sexual abuse?  •   Define pedophilia, incest, and rape, and summarize the major clinical features of the perpetrators of these crimes.  •   Identify the main goals of treatment of sex offenders, and describe the different treatment approaches.  Sexual Dysfunctions  The term   sexual dysfunction   refers to impairment either in the desire for sexual gratification or in the ability to achieve it. The impairment varies markedly in degree, but regardless of which partner is alleged to be dysfunctional, the enjoyment of sex by both parties in a relationship is typically adversely affected. Sexual dysfunctions occur in both heterosexual and homosexual couples. In some cases, sexual dysfunctions are caused primar- ily by psychological or interpersonal factors. In others, physical factors are most important, including many cases of sexual dys- function that are secondary consequences of medications people may be taking for other, unrelated medical conditions (Baron- Kuhn & Segraves, 2007). In recent years, both explanations and treatments of sexual dysfunction have become more biological, although some psychological treatments have been   empirically  validated , and psychosocial factors clearly play a causal role as well (Heiman, 2002; Meston & Rellini, 2008; Segraves & Althof, 2002). Today researchers and clinicians typically identify four different phases of the human sexual response as originally pro- posed by Masters and Johnson (1966, 1970, 1975) and Kaplan (1979). According to   DSM-5 , disorders can occur in any of the first three phases:  • The first phase is the   desire phase , which consists of fantasies about sexual activity or a sense of desire to have sexual activity.  • The second phase is the   excitement (or arousal) phase , characterized both by a subjective sense of sexual pleasure and by physiological changes that accompany this subjective pleasure, including penile erection in the male and vaginal lubrication and clitoral enlargement in the female.  • The third phase is   orgasm , during which there is a release of sexual tension and a peaking of sexual pleasure.  • The final phase is   resolution , during which the person has a sense of relaxation and well-being. Although these four phases are described as if they were dis- tinct, it is important to remember that they are experienced by an individual as a continuous set of feelings and biological and behavioral reactions. There are other conceivable ways to discuss and organize the sequence that occurs. Indeed, in   DSM-5,  female sexual interest/arousal disorder replaces two separate disorders in   DSM-IV-TR , because research has not adequately demonstrated that sexual interest and arousal are distinguishable in women (Brotto, 2010; Graham, 2010). How common are sexual dysfunctions? It is obviously difficult to do large-scale research on such a sensitive topic. Nevertheless, the National Health and Social Life Survey (Laumann et al., 1999) assessed sexual problems in 3,159 randomly selected Americans by asking them if they had experienced the symptoms of any of the different sexual dys- functions in the past 12 months. Sexual problems were very common, with 43 percent of women and 31 percent of men reporting having experienced at least one of these problems in the previous 12 months. For women, the reported rate of sexual problems decreased with age; for men it increased. Married men and women, and those with higher educational attainment, had lower rates of problems. For women, the most common complaints were lack of sexual desire (22 percent) and sexual arousal problems (14 percent). For men, climax- ing too early (21 percent), erectile dysfunction (5 percent), and lack of sexual interest (5 percent) were reported most frequently. However, this study was criticized by Bancroft et al. (2003), who believe that these numbers overestimate how many people have true sexual dysfunctions. Although the  research ClOSe-up  Empirically Validated  Empirically validated treatments are treatments that have been determined to be helpful based on well-designed, sci- entific research by more than just one group of researchers.  Sexual dysfunctions can occur in the desire, excitement, or orgasm phases of the sexual response cycle. Many people, if not most, will expe- rience some sexual dysfunction sometime during their lives. If it becomes chronic or disturbing to one or both partners, it warrants treatment.
Men Delayed ejaculation A.   Either of the following symptoms must be experienced on almost all or all occasions (approximately 75%–100%) of part- nered sexual activity (in identified situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts), and without the individual desir- ing delay:  1.   Marked delay in ejaculation.  2.   Marked infrequency or absence of ejaculation  B.   The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months.  C.   The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.  D.   The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or as a consequence of severe relationship dis- tress or other significant stressors and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another medical condition.  erectile Disorder A.   At least one of the three following symptoms must be experi- enced on almost all or all (approximately 75%–100%) occasions of sexual activity (in identified situational contexts or, if gener- alized, in all contexts):  1.   Marked difficulty in obtaining an erection during sexual activity.  2.   Marked difficulty in maintaining an erection until the com- pletion of sexual activity.  3.   Marked decrease in erectile rigidity.  B.   The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum dura- tion of approximately 6 months.  C.   The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.  D.   The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or as a consequence of severe relationship distress or other significant stressors and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another medical condition.  Premature (early) ejaculation A.   A persistent or recurrent pattern of ejaculation occurring during partnered sexual activity within approximately 1 minute follow- ing vaginal penetration and before the individual wishes it.  note:   Although the diagnosis of premature (early) ejaculation may be applied to individuals engaged in nonvaginal sexual activities, specific duration criteria have not been established for these activities.  B.   The symptom in Criterion A must have been present for at least 6 months and must be experienced on almost all or all (approximately 75%–100%) occasions of sexual activity (in identified situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts).  C.   The symptom in Criterion A causes clinically significant distress in the individual.  D.   The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or as a consequence of severe relationship distress or other significant stressors and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another medical condition.  Male Hypoactive sexual Desire Disorder A.   Persistently or recurrently deficient (or absent) sexual/ erotic thoughts or fantasies and desire for sexual activity. The judgment of deficiency is made by the clinician, taking into account factors that affect sexual functioning, such as age and general and sociocultural contexts of the individu- al’s life.  B.   The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum dura- tion of approximately 6 months.  C.   The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.  D.   The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or as a consequence of severe relationship distress or other significant stressors and is not attributable to thes effects of a substance/medication or another medical condition.  Women Female orgasmic Disorder A.   Presence of either of the following symptoms and experienced on almost all or all (approximately 75%–100%) occasions of sexual activity (in identified situational contexts or, if general- ized, in all contexts):  1.   Marked delay in, marked infrequency of, or absence of orgasm.  2.   Markedly reduced intensity of orgasmic sensations.  B.   The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months.  C.   The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant dis- tress in the individual.  D.   The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a non- sexual mental disorder or as a consequence of severe rela- tionship distress (e.g., partner violence) or other significant stressors and is not attributable to the effects of a sub- stance/medication or another medical condition.  Female sexual interest/Arousal Disorder A.   Lack of, or significantly reduced, sexual interest/arousal, as manifested by at least three of the following:  1.   Absent/reduced interest in sexual activity.  2.   Absent/reduced sexual/erotic thoughts or fantasies.  3.   No/reduced initiation of sexual activity, and typically unre- ceptive to a partner’s attempts to initiate.  4.   Absent/reduced sexual excitement/pleasure during sexual activity in almost all or all (approximately 75%–100%) sexual encounters (in identified situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts).  criteria for  Different Sexual Dysfunctions   DSM- 5
Laumann and colleagues’ results are often referred to as being about sexual   dysfunction , in fact, the investigators never asked people about whether the problems caused them distress or impairment in any way; yet these are necessary criteria for making a diagnosis in   DSM-5 . When Bancroft et al. (2003) did a related survey (although just in women), they found very similar percentages to those found by Laumann and col- leagues. However, Bancroft and colleagues found that only about half as many reported that the problem caused them “severe distress.” Nevertheless, this is still a relatively high percentage of people experiencing sexual dysfunction at some point in their lives. Interestingly, a later study of 27,500 people across 29 coun- tries all over the world revealed fairly similar results (Laumann et al., 2005). There were some differences, of course, in prevalence across countries, but the results were more similar than different. East Asian and Southeast Asian countries reported slightly higher rates of sexual problems than most other countries. The “ DSM-5   Criteria” box above summarizes each of the dysfunctions covered here.  sexual Dysfunctions in Men  For cultural reasons, and possibly also for biological reasons, sex is thought to be especially important to men. Certainly the pharmaceutical industry has capitalized on men’s distress about sexual dysfunction, earning billions of dollars from sales of treat- ments for male sexual dysfunction, primarily   erectile disorder . Whether men are actually more upset than women by sexual dysfunction or this is simply one more domain where women’s feelings have been ignored until recently, there is no dispute that we know far more about men’s sexual dysfunctions than women’s.  5.   Absent/reduced sexual interest/arousal in response to any internal or external sexual/erotic cues (e.g., written, verbal, visual).  6.   Absent/reduced genital or nongenital sensations during sexual activity in almost all or all (approximately 75%– 100%) sexual encounters (in identified situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts).  B.   The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months.  C.   The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.  D.   The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or as a consequence of severe relationship distress (e.g., partner violence) or other significant stressors and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another medical condition.  genito-Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder A.   Persistent or recurrent difficulties with one (or more) of the fol- lowing:  1.   Vaginal penetration during intercourse.  2.   Marked vulvovaginal or pelvic pain during vaginal inter- course or penetration attempts.  3.   Marked fear or anxiety about vulvovaginal or pelvic pain in anticipation of, during, or as a result of vaginal penetration. 4.   Marked tensing or tightening of the pelvic floor muscles during attempted vaginal penetration.  B.   The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months.  C.   The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.  D.   The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or as a consequence of a severe relationship distress (e.g., partner violence) or other significant stressors and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another medical condition.  Men/Women substance/Medication-induced sexual Dysfunction A.   A clinically significant disturbance in sexual function is predom- inant in the clinical picture.  B.   There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both (1) and (2):  1.   The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxication or withdrawal or after expo- sure to a medication.  2.   The involved substance/medication is capable of produc- ing the symptoms in Criterion A.  C.   The disturbance is not better explained by a sexual dysfunction that is not substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent sexual dysfunction could include the following: The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence suggesting the existence of an independent non-substance/medication- induced sexual dysfunction (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).  D.   The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.  e.   The disturbance causes clinically significant distress in the indi- vidual.  note:   This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.  source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.
Male Hypoactive sexual Desire Disorder  Hypoactive sexual desire disorder is diagnosed in men who have for at least 6 months been distressed or impaired due to low levels of sexual thoughts, desires, or fantasies. Men given this diagnosis are also assessed for the course of the dysfunction (i.e., lifelong or acquired) and possible causal factors, including problems emanating from partners, relationships, cultural beliefs or attitudes, personal vulnerabilities (e.g., poor body image), or medical conditions. Despite the historically higher level of attention to male than to female sexual dysfunctions, this is one disorder in men that has received relatively little attention—and substantially less than its parallel disorder in women (Brotto, 2010). In the large American survey conducted by Laumann et al. (1999), men in the oldest cohort (50–59 years old) were three times more likely to suffer from low desire compared with men in the youngest cohort (18–29 years old). Predictors of low desire included daily alcohol use, stress, unmarried status, and poorer health. In a large British survey, complaints of low inter- est in sex was the most common problem reported by men (17.1 percent; Mercer et al., 2003). However, only a small minority (1.8 percent) of the male sample had low desire for the required 6 month period to qualify for diagnosis. Most experts believe that   male hypoactive sexual desire disorder   is acquired or situational rather than lifelong. Typical situational risk factors include depression and relationship stress.  Treatment   The treatment literature on low sexual desire in men is scant. In men whose testosterone levels are markedly low (including hypogonadal men whose testes make insufficient tes- tosterone and men with HIV that diminishes their testosterone production), testosterone injections have helped (Brotto, 2010). Because psychological factors are more closely linked to low male sexual desire compared with hormonal factors, psychological treatments may be more effective for other men.  eReCTile DisoRDeR   Inability to achieve or maintain an erec- tion sufficient for successful sexual intercourse was formerly called   impotence . It is now known as   male erectile disorder   and can be diagnosed only when the difficulties are considered to originate from either psychogenic or a combination of psycho- genic and medical factors (see “ DSM-5   Criteria” on p. 432). In lifelong erectile disorder, a man with adequate sexual desire has never been able to sustain an erection long enough to accom- plish a satisfactory duration of penetration. In acquired or situ- ational erectile disorder, a man with adequate sexual desire has had at least one successful experience of sexual activity requir- ing an erection but is presently unable to produce or maintain the required level of penile rigidity. Lifelong erectile disorder is relatively rare, but most men of all ages occasionally have dif- ficulty obtaining or maintaining an erection. Laumann et al. (1999) landmark study on the prevalence of sexual dysfunction estimates that 7 percent of 18- to 19-year-old men and 18 per- cent of 50- to 59-year-old men reported having erectile disorder. Masters and Johnson (1975; Masters et al., 1992) and Kaplan (1987) hypothesized that erectile dysfunction is primarily a func- tion of anxiety about sexual performance. In other reviews of the accumulated evidence, however, Barlow and colleagues (Beck & Barlow, 1984a; Sbrocco & Barlow, 1996) have played down the role of anxiety per se—because under some circumstances, anxiety can actually enhance sexual performance in normally function- ing men and women (Barlow et al., 1983; Palace & Gorzalka, 1990; see Sbrocco & Barlow, 1996, for a review). Barlow (2002) emphasizes that it is the cognitive distractions frequently associ- ated with anxiety in dysfunctional people that seem to interfere with their sexual arousal. For example, one study found that nondysfunctional men who were distracted by material they were listening to on earphones while watching an erotic film showed less sexual arousal than men who were not distracted (Abrahamson et al., 1985). Barlow and colleagues hypothesize that sexually dys- functional men and women get distracted by negative thoughts about their performance during a sexual encounter (“I’ll never get aroused” or “She’ll think I’m inadequate”). Their research suggests that this preoccupation with negative thoughts, rather than anxiety per se, is responsible for inhibiting sexual arousal (see also Weiner & Rosen, 1999; Wincze et al., 2008). Moreover, such self-defeat- ing thoughts not only decrease pleasure but also can increase anxi- ety if the erection does not happen, and this in turn can fuel fur- ther negative, self-defeating thoughts (Sbrocco & Barlow, 1996). A related finding is that men with erectile dysfunction make more internal and stable causal attributions for hypothetical negative sexual events than do men without sexual dysfunction, much as depressed people do for more general hypothetical negative events (Nobre, 2010; Scepkowski et al., 2004). Combined with Bancroft and colleagues’ (2005) findings that fear of performance failure is a strong predictor of erectile dysfunction in both gay and heterosex- ual men, one can see how a vicious cycle develops in which fears of failure are sometimes followed by erectile dysfunction, which is then attributed to internal and stable causes, thereby perpetuating the problem. Erectile problems occur in as many as 90 percent of men on certain antidepressant medications (especially the SSRIs) and are one of the primary reasons men cite for discontinuing these medications (Rosen & Marin, 2003). These problems are also a common consequence of aging. One large study of over 1,400 men found that 37 percent between ages 57 and 85 reported significant erectile difficulties, with the problems gradually increasing with age (Lindau et al., 2007). However, complete and permanent erectile disorder before the age of 60 is relatively rare. Moreover, studies have indicated that men and women in their 80s and 90s are often quite capable of enjoying intercourse (Masters et al., 1992; Meston & Rellini, 2008). For example, in one study of 202 healthy men and women between the ages of 80 and 102, it was found that nearly two-thirds of the men
and one-third of the women were still having sexual intercourse, although this was generally not their most common form of sexual activity (Bretschneider & McCoy, 1988). The most frequent cause of erectile disorder in older men is vascular disease, which results in decreased blood flow to the penis or in diminished ability of the penis to hold blood to maintain an erection. Thus hardening of the arteries, high blood pressure, and other diseases such as diabetes that cause vascular problems often account for erectile disorder. Smoking, obesity, and alcohol abuse are associated lifestyle factors, and lifestyle changes can improve erectile function (Gupta et al., 2011). Diseases that affect the nervous system, such as multiple sclerosis, can also cause erectile problems. For young men, one cause of erectile problems is having had priapism—that is, an erection that will not diminish even after a couple of hours, typically unaccompanied by sexual excitement. Priapism can occur as a result of prolonged sexual activity, as a consequence of disease, or as a side effect of certain medications. Untreated cases of priapism are likely to result in erectile dysfunction and thus should be regarded as a medical emergency (Morrison & Burnett, 2011).  Treatment   A variety of treatments—primarily medical— have been employed in recent years, often when cognitive-behav- ioral treatments have failed. These include: (1) medications that promote erections like Viagra, Levitra, and Cialis; (2) injections of smooth-muscle-relaxing drugs into the penile erection cham- bers (corpora cavernosa); and (3) even a vacuum pump (Duterte et al., 2007; Rosen, 1996). In extreme cases, for example when erections are impossible due to nerve damage that can be a con- sequence of surgery for prostate cancer, penile implants may still be used. These devices can be inflated to provide erection on demand. They are made of silicone rubber or polyurethane rubber. Such treatments have generally shown success in clini- cal trials, although they are rather extreme interventions that often evoke bothersome side effects such as decreased penis size (Duterte et al., 2007). They were used in thousands of cases in the 1960s and 1970s before current medications were available. In 1998 the revolutionary drug Viagra (sildenalfil) was introduced on the U.S. market and was received with a great deal of attention. Viagra works by making nitric oxide, the primary neurotransmitter involved in penile erection, more available. Viagra is taken orally at least 30 to 60 minutes before sexual activity. Unlike some other biological treatments for erec- tile dysfunction, Viagra promotes erection only if some sexual excitation is present. Thus, contrary to some myths, Viagra does not improve libido or promote spontaneous erections (Duterte et al., 2007; Segraves & Althof, 2002). Two other related medications introduced in 2003 to treat erectile dysfunction are Levitra (vardenafil; Stark et al., 2001) and Cialis (tadalafil; Padma-Nathan et al., 2001), with the effects of Cialis being lon- ger lasting (up to 36 hours). Clinical trials of these medications have been impressive. In one early double-blind study, over 70 percent of men receiving at least 50 mg of Viagra reported that their erections had improved, compared with fewer than 30 per- cent of men receiving a placebo (Carlson, 1997; see also Gold- stein et al., 1998). Results with Cialis and Levitra are similar. Overall efficacy rates in terms of ability to obtain an erection are 40 to 80 percent, but levels of satisfaction are often much lower, perhaps because these medications do not increase sexual desire or satisfaction and perhaps because sexual desire and satisfaction are more closely intertwined with psychological and relation- ship factors. Side effects are relatively uncommon and not seri- ous (e.g., the most common side effects are headache and facial flushing, seen in 10 to 20 percent of men), provided that the person had no serious preexisting heart problems (Duterte et al., 2007). When heart problems do exist, these medications should be prescribed with caution because they can interact in danger- ous ways with heart medications. These medications have been highly successful commercially—for example, in 2008 almost $2 billion worth of Viagra was sold. Interestingly, however, many men who fill one prescription never refill it, according to the drug companies’ own statistics. The commercial success of drugs like Viagra and Cialis is an indication of both the high prevalence of sexual dysfunction in men and the importance that people attach to sexual performance. There are also a few studies showing that the usefulness of these medications may be further enhanced when used in conjunction with cognitive-behavioral treatment (e.g., Bach et al., 2004; Meston & Rellini, 2008).  eARly ejACulATion   In   DSM-5   “premature ejaculation,” is called early ejaculation disorder, the persistent and recurrent onset of orgasm and ejaculation with minimal sexual stimula- tion. It may occur before, on, or shortly after penetration and before the man wants it to (see “DSM-5 Criteria” on p. 432). The average duration of time to ejaculate in men with this problem is 15 seconds or 15 thrusts of intercourse. The conse- quences often include failure of the partner to achieve satisfac- tion and, often, acute embarrassment for the early ejaculating man, with disruptive anxiety about recurrence on future occa- sions. Men who have had this problem from their first sexual encounter often try to diminish sexual excitement by avoiding stimulation, by self-distracting, and by “spectatoring,” or psy- chologically taking the role of an observer rather than a par- ticipant (Metz et al., 1997). Early ejaculation decreases sexual and relationship satisfaction both in men who have it and their partners (Graziottin & Althof, 2011). An exact definition of prematurity is necessarily somewhat arbitrary. For example, the age of a client must be considered— the alleged “quick trigger” of the younger man being more than a mere myth (McCarthy, 1989). Indeed, perhaps half of young men complain of early ejaculation. Not surprisingly, early ejacu- lation is most likely after a lengthy abstinence.   DSM-5   acknowl- edges these many factors that may affect time to ejaculation
by noting that the diagnosis is made only if ejaculation occurs before, on, or shortly after penetration and before the man wants it to. Early ejaculation is the most common male sexual dysfunc- tion at least up to age 59 (Meston & Rellini, 2008; Segraves & Althof, 2002). In sexually normal men, the ejaculatory reflex is, to a considerable extent, under voluntary control. They monitor their sensations during sexual stimulation and are somehow able, perhaps by judicious use of distraction, to forestall the point of ejaculatory inevitability until they decide to “let go,” with the average latency to ejaculation from penetration being 10 minutes for men with no sexual problems. Men with early ejaculation are for some reason unable to use this technique effectively. Explanations have ranged from psychological fac- tors such as increased anxiety, to physiological factors such as increased penile sensitivity and higher levels of arousal to sexual stimuli. Presently, however, no explanation has received much empirical support, and it is clear that none of these possible explanations alone can account for all men with the problem (Meston & Rellini, 2008).  Treatment   For many years, most sex therapists consid- ered early ejaculation to be psychogenically caused and highly treatable via behavioral therapy such as the pause-and-squeeze technique developed by Masters and Johnson (1970). This technique requires the man to monitor his sexual arousal during sexual activity. When arousal is intense enough that the man feels that ejaculation might occur soon, he pauses, and he or his partner squeezes the head of the penis for a few moments until the feeling of pending ejaculation passes, repeating the stopping of intercourse as many times as needed to delay ejaculation. Initial reports suggested that this tech- nique was approximately 60 to 90 percent effective; however, more recent studies have reported a much lower overall suc- cess rate (Duterte et al., 2007; Segraves & Althof, 2002). In recent years, for men for whom behavioral treatments have not worked, there has been increasing interest in the possible use of pharmacological interventions. Antidepressants such as paroxetine (Paxil), sertraline (Zoloft), fluoxetine (Prozac), and dapoxetine (Priligy), which block serotonin reuptake, have been found to significantly prolong ejaculatory latency in men with early ejaculation (Porst, 2011). Evidence sug- gests, however, that the medications work only as long as they are being taken.  DelAyeD ejACulATion DisoRDeR   Sometimes called   re- tarded ejaculation ,   delayed ejaculation disorder   refers to the persistent inability to ejaculate during intercourse (see “ DSM-5  Criteria” on p. 432). It occurs in only about 3 to 10 percent of men. Men who are completely unable to ejaculate are rare. About 85 percent of men who have difficulty ejaculating during intercourse can nevertheless achieve orgasm by other means of stimulation, notably through solitary masturbation (Wincze et al., 2008). In milder cases a man can ejaculate in the presence of a partner but only by means of manual or oral stimulation. In other cases, delayed ejaculation can be related to specific physical problems such as multiple sclerosis or to the use of cer- tain medications. For example, we noted that antidepressants that block serotonin reuptake appear to be an effective treat- ment for early ejaculation. However, in other men, these same medications—especially the SSRIs—sometimes delay or prevent orgasm to an unpleasant extent (Ashton et al., 1997; Meston & Rellini, 2008). These side effects are common but can sometimes be treated pharmacologically with medications like Viagra (Ash- ton et al., 1997).  Treatment   Psychological treatments include couples therapy in which a man tries to get used to having orgasms through intercourse with a partner rather than via masturba- tion. Treatment may also emphasize the reduction of per- formance anxiety about the importance of having an orgasm versus sexual pleasure and intimacy in addition to increasing genital stimulation (Meston & Rellini, 2008; Segraves & Althof, 2002).  Female sexual interest/Arousal Disorder  Research suggests that women with low desire tend to have low levels of sexual arousal during sexual activity and vice versa. There are no common syndromes in which women with low sexual desire have normal levels of sexual arousal, or vice versa. Thus for women,   DSM-5   has combined dysfunction- ally low desire with dysfunctionally low sexual arousal in the disorder   Female Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorder . Another interesting change from   DSM-IV-TR   to   DSM-5   is the elimi- nation of   sexual aversion disorder,   in which a person shows extreme aversion to, and avoidance of, all genital sexual con- tact with a partner. A leading researcher on sexual dysfunction has recently argued that sexual aversion disorder should be considered as an anxiety disorder akin to simple phobias rather than as a sexual dysfunction (Brotto, 2010). Perhaps this is one reason why it was eliminated from the Sexual Dysfunc- tions section of   DSM-5 . Research on the degree to which the diminished sex drive has a biological basis remains controversial, but in many (and perhaps most) cases (and especially in women), psychologi- cal factors appear to be more important than biological factors (Meston & Bradford, 2007; Segraves & Woodard, 2006). In the past, these people usually came to the attention of clinicians pri- marily at the request of their partners (who typically complained of insufficient sexual interaction), but as public knowledge about the frequency of this disorder has increased, more people are
presenting for treatment on their own. This fact exposes one problem with the diagnosis, because it is known that preferences for frequency of sexual contact vary widely among otherwise normal individuals. Who is to decide what is “not enough”?  DSM-5   explicitly indicates that this judgment is left to the clini- cian, taking into account the person’s age and the context of his or her life. Prior or current depression or anxiety disorders may contrib- ute to many cases of sexual desire disorders (Meston & Bradford, 2007). Although sexual desire disorders typically occur in the absence of obvious physical pathology, there is evidence that physical factors sometimes play a role. For example, in both men and women, sexual desire depends in part on testosterone (Alex- ander & Sherwin, 1993; Meston & Rellini, 2008). That sexual desire problems increase with age may be in part attributable to declining levels of testosterone, but testosterone replacement therapy is usually not beneficial, except in men and women who have very low testosterone levels (Meston & Rellini, 2008). In addition, medications from the SSRI category of antidepressants (see Chapters 7 and 16) not uncommonly reduce sexual desire. Different antidepressants vary considerably in their negative effect on sexual function, and psychiatrists have not always paid close enough attention to the impact that these effects have on patients’ general functioning (Serretti & Chiesa, 2009). Psycho- logical factors thought to contribute to sexual desire disorders include low relationship satisfaction, daily hassles and worries, increased disagreements and conflicts, low levels of feelings, and reduced cues of emotional bonding (Meston & Rellini, 2008). In some cases a history of unwanted sexual experiences such as rape may also contribute. Among the   DSM-IV-TR   diagnoses hypoactive sexual desire disorder was the most common female sexual dysfunc- tion in the United States and most other countries across the world (Laumann et al., 1994, 1999, 2005), and there is no reason to doubt that female sexual interest/arousal disorder is the most common   DSM-5   female sexual dysfunction. Despite this fact, disorders of female sexual desire have inspired far less research into its origins and treatment than have most male dysfunctions, especially erectile disorder and early ejacula- tion. One main reason for this disparity is doubtless the great importance that many men place on their ability to perform sexually. Until recently, there has also been a more general neglect of female sexuality and an implicit (though largely mistaken) societal attitude that women simply do not care much about sex. Fortunately, this has been changing gradually in recent years (e.g., Althof et al., 2005; Basson, 2005; Meston & Bradford, 2007). One emerging finding is that it is uncommon for women to cite sexual desire as a reason or incentive for sexual activity. For many women, sexual desire is experienced only after sexual stimuli have led to subjective sexual arousal (Basson, 2003a; Meston & Bradford, 2007), and for others, motivation for sexual activity may involve a desire for increasing emotional intimacy or increasing one’s sense of well-being and one’s self-image as an attractive female (Basson, 2003, 2005). Thus, some research suggests that the supposedly linear sequence of desire leading to arousal, leading to orgasm that was originally posited for women as well as men by Masters and Johnson (1970) and the   DSM  is not very accurate for women (e.g., Basson, 2005; Meston & Bradford, 2007). Until recently studied separately from low sexual desire, dysfunctionally low sexual arousal in women was formerly and somewhat pejoratively known as   frigidity . In   DSM-IV- TR   female sexual arousal disorder—the absence of feelings of sexual arousal and an unresponsiveness to most or all forms of erotic stimulation—was in many ways the female counterpart of erectile disorder (see “ DSM-5   Criteria” on p. 433). Its chief physical manifestation was a failure to pro- duce the characteristic swelling and lubrication of the vulva and vaginal tissues during sexual stimulation—a condition that may make intercourse quite uncomfortable and orgasm impossible. Although the causes of low sexual arousal are not well understood, possible reasons range from early sexual trau- matization; to excessive and distorted socialization about the “evils” of sex; to dislike of, or disgust with, a current partner’s sexuality; to her partner’s restricted repertoire of sexual activ- ity. One interesting study also found that women with sexual arousal disorder show lower tactile sensitivity than is seen in other women; the lower their level of tactile sensitivity, the more severe their arousal dysfunction (Frolich & Meston, 2005). Biological causal factors include the use of SSRIs for anxiety and depression, the occurrence of certain medical ill- nesses (e.g., spinal cord injury, cancer treatment, diabetes, etc.), and the decreases in estrogen levels that occur during and following menopause. Some difficulties with physiological arousal and lubrication have been noted in 20 to 30 percent of sexually active women and in as many as 44 percent of post- menopausal women. Moreover, arousal problems in women very frequently co-occur with low levels of sexual desire; thus the new   DSM-5   combined diagnosis. Indeed, having problems with sexual arousal may often lead to lack of desire (Meston & Bradford, 2007).  Treatment   Although there has been interest since antiq- uity in the possibility that a drug to increase sexual desire might be found, no effective aphrodisiacs yet exist. As noted earlier, testosterone appears to be effective only in men and women who have very low levels of testosterone; that is, raising levels of this important sex hormone above normal levels has no beneficial effects (e.g., Meston & Rellini, 2008). Consistent with an effect of hormones, a German study showed that women using oral contraceptions, which sometimes work by raising estrogen levels, which in turn reduce testosterone levels, had somewhat lower
levels of sexual desire and arousal compared with those who did not (Wallwiener et al., 2010). Several studies have found that sustained use of bupro- pion (an atypical antidepressant), relative to placebo, improved sexual arousability and orgasm frequency in women who were in a committed relationship and had hypoactive sexual desire disorder (e.g., Segraves et al., 2004). Another drug, flibanserin, has been developed to increase sexual desire in women, but the Food and Drug Administration denied approval for this use in 2010, saying that there is not yet suf- ficient research (Wilson, 2010). Pharmaceutical companies are eager to find a treatment for low sexual desire in women, but some women have argued that the companies are more concerned about making money than about curing a legiti- mate illness (Segal, 2008). There are no well-established psychotherapies for hypoac- tive sexual desire. Typically therapists focus on education, com- munication training, cognitive restructuring of dysfunctional beliefs about sexuality, sexual fantasy training, and sensate focus training (Meston & Rellini, 2008). Sensate focus exercises are also used in the treatment of several other forms of sexual dys- functions, as we will see. They involve teaching couples to focus on the pleasurable sensations brought about by touching without the goal of actually having intercourse or orgasm. Relationship problems often contribute importantly to low sexual desire, as do concerns related to body-image (Basson, 2010). Addressing these problems thus may be helpful. Few controlled treatment studies of low sexual arousal in women have been conducted (Meston & Bradford, 2007), although clinical experience suggests that psychotherapy and sex therapy may play important roles in helping women with this disorder. Typically the techniques that are used are similar to those used to increase sexual desire. The widespread use of vaginal lubricants may effectively mask and treat the symptoms of this disorder in many women, but lubricants do not enhance genital blood flow or genital sensations. In addition, because female genital response depends in part on the same neurotransmitter systems as male geni- tal response, there has been great interest in the possibility that Viagra, Levitra, or Cialis would have positive effects for women analogous to their positive effects for men (Meston & Rellini, 2008). Unfortunately, enough research has now been performed to make it clear that such drugs are not as useful for women as they are for men (Basson et al., 2002; Meston & Rellini, 2008). Although these medications may enhance geni- tal arousal and perceptions of physical sensations in women, they do not affect women’s psychological experiences of arousal. It is likely that women’s sexual desire and arousal are more dependent on relationship satisfaction and mood than they are in men.  geniTo-PelViC PAin/PeneTRATion DisoRDeR   This disorder represents an important change in   DSM-5 . In past versions of   DSM-IV-TR   were distinguished two “sexual pain disorders”: vaginismus and dyspareunia. The disorders have been combined in   DSM-5   because scientific research did not support their distinction (Binik, 2010a, 2010b). In particular, vaginismus has been believed to be an involun- tary spasm of the muscles near the entrance of the vagina, preventing penetration and sexual intercourse. However, no scientific evidence exists that women with vaginismus have vaginal spasms or that vaginismus could be reliably diag- nosed. In contrast, women diagnosed with vaginismus com- monly complained of pain during penetration and anxiety before and during sexual encounters (Reissing et al., 2003). The latter symptoms made the distinction between vagi- nismus and dyspareunia (which is genital pain associated with sexual intercourse) unclear. That is, women with a past diagnosis of vaginismus were not clearly distinct from those with a past diagnosis of dyspareunia. Furthermore, as noted, the hallmark “symptom” of vaginismus, does not clearly occur, while the hallmark symptom of dyspareunia, geni- tal pain during penetration, occurs commonly in women with vaginismus as well. Thus, in   DSM-5   there is only one  genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder , which combines the genital pain of dyspareunia with muscle tension (not muscle spasms) and fear and anxiety related to genital pain or penetrative sexual activity. Based on past studies of women with “sexual pain disor- ders” it appears that genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is more likely to have organic than psychological causes. Some examples of physical causes include acute or chronic infec- tions or inflammations of the vagina or internal reproductive organs, vaginal atrophy that occurs with aging, scars from vaginal tearing, or insufficiency of sexual arousal. Under- standably, dyspareunia is often associated with vaginismus, and some have questioned whether they are indeed distinct disorders. Recently, some prominent sex researchers have argued against classifying sexual pain disorders as “sexual disorders” rather than as “pain disorders” (e.g., Binik, 2005; Binik et al., 2007). For example, Binik and colleagues argue that the pain in “sexual pain disorders” is qualitatively similar to the pain in other, nonsexual areas of the body and that the causes of “sexual pain disorder” are more similar to the causes of other pain dis- orders (e.g., lower back pain) than to the causes of other sexual dysfunctions. This concern is represented in the new name for the diagnosis (i.e., genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder). It is also interesting to note in this regard that the disorder sometimes precedes any sexual experiences—for example, in some adoles- cent girls trying to use a tampon.
Treatment   In past treatment studies of vaginismus and dyspareunia, cognitive-behavioral interventions have been effec- tive in some cases. Cognitive-behavioral treatment techniques tend to include education about sexuality, identifying and correcting maladaptive cognitions, graduated vaginal dilation exercises to facilitate vaginal penetration, and progressive muscle relaxation (e.g., Bergeron, Binik et al., 2001). Medical treat- ments, such as surgical removal of the vulvar vestibule, a small area of the vulva between the labia minora, can be very successful (Binik, 2010a). It is likely that genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder comprises several distinct syndromes with different eti- ologies and potentially different treatments. If so, the more we learn, the better our treatment options will be.  FeMAle oRgAsMiC DisoRDeR   The diagnosis of orgasmic dysfunction in women is complicated by the fact that the sub- jective quality of orgasm varies widely among women, within the same woman from time to time, and in regard to mode of stimulation (Graham, 2010). Nevertheless, according to   DSM-5 ,  female orgasmic disorder   can be diagnosed in women who are readily sexually excitable and who otherwise enjoy sexual activ- ity but who show persistent or recurrent delay in or absence of orgasm following a normal sexual excitement phase and who are distressed by this (see “ DSM-5   Criteria” on p. 433). Of these women, many do not routinely experience orgasm during sexual intercourse without direct supplemental stimulation of the cli- toris; indeed, this pattern is so common that it is generally not considered dysfunctional (Meston & Bradford, 2007). A small percentage of women are able to achieve orgasm only through direct mechanical stimulation of the clitoris, as in vigorous digital manipulation, oral stimulation, or the use of an electric vibrator. Even fewer are unable to have the experience under any known conditions of stimulation; this condition, which is called lifelong orgasmic dysfunction, is analogous to lifelong erectile disorder in males. More commonly, women experience difficulty having an orgasm only in certain situations or were able to achieve orgasm in the past but currently can rarely do so (Meston & Bradford, 2007). Laumann et al. (1999) found that rates of this disorder are highest in the 21- to 24-year-old age category and decline thereafter, and other studies have estimated that about one in three or four women report having had signifi- cant orgasmic difficulties in the past year (Meston & Bradford, 2007). What causes female orgasmic disorder is not well understood, but a multitude of contributory factors have been hypothesized. For example, some women feel fearful and inadequate in sexual relations. A woman may be uncertain whether her partner finds her sexually attractive, and this may lead to anxiety and tension, which then interfere with her sexual enjoyment. Or she may feel inadequate or experience sexual guilt (especially common in religious women) because she is unable to have an orgasm or does so infrequently. Sometimes a nonorgasmic woman will pretend to have orgasms to make her sexual partner feel fully adequate. The longer a woman maintains such a pretense, however, the more likely she is to become confused and frustrated; in addition, she is likely to resent her partner for being insensitive to her real feelings and needs. This in turn only adds to her sexual difficulties. Possible biological causal factors sometimes contributing to orgasmic difficulties in women (as they do in men) include intake of the SSRIs as antidepressant medications. Many medi- cal conditions already mentioned with other sexual disorders are also sometimes associated with orgasmic difficulties (Meston & Rellini, 2008). Recent evidence suggests that differences between women in their genital anatomy may allow some women to have orgasms during intercourse more easily than other women can (Wallen & Lloyd, 2011).  Treatment   One important issue regarding treatment is whether women should seek it or not. Most clinicians agree that a woman with lifelong orgasmic disorder needs treatment if she is to become orgasmic. However, in the middle range of orgas- mic responsiveness, our own view is that this question is best left to a woman herself to answer. If she is dissatisfied about her responsiveness, then she should seek treatment. For those who do seek treatment, it is important to distin- guish between lifelong and situational female orgasmic dysfunc- tion. Cognitive-behavioral treatment of orgasmic dysfunction usually involves education about female sexuality and female sexual anatomy, as well as directed masturbation exercises. Later the partner may be included to explore these activities with the client. For those with lifelong orgasmic dysfunction, such programs can have nearly a 100 percent success rate in terms of the woman’s ability to have an orgasm at least through mastur- bation, but transition to having an orgasm with a partner can be slow and difficult in some cases (Meston & Rellini, 2008). “Situational” anorgasmia (where a woman may experience orgasm in some situations, with certain kinds of stimulation, or with certain partners, but not under the precise conditions she desires) often proves more difficult to treat, perhaps in part because it is often associated with relationship problems that may also be hard to treat (Althof & Schreiner-Engel, 2000).  in review  •   Compare and contrast the symptoms of the dysfunctions of sexual desire, arousal, and orgasm in men and women.  •   Why have common female sexual dysfunctions been studied less than male sexual dysfunctions?  •   What are the most effective treatments for male erectile disorder and premature ejaculation and for female orgasmic disorder?
unreSOlveD issues  How Harmful Is Childhood Sexual Abuse?  M ost contemporary Americans believe that childhood sexual abuse (CSA) is very harmful. This is reflected both in their concern for the victims of CSA and in their outrage at its perpetrators. The assumption of harmfulness is so deeply ingrained that many people find it shocking even to consider the alternative possibility that, at least sometimes, CSA is not very harmful. Surely, though, the issue of harm is answer- able by empirical means. What do the results show? In 1998 psychologist Bruce Rind of Temple University and two col- leagues published, in the prestigious journal   Psychological Bulle- tin,   an article reviewing 49 previous studies that had asked college students about their sexual experiences during childhood (Rind et al., 1998). Furthermore, the studies assessed the students’ current adjustment, enabling Rind and colleagues to examine the associa- tion between early sexual experiences and mental health in young adulthood. Here are some conclusions of this study:  • Correlations between childhood sexual abuse and later prob - lems were of surprisingly small magnitude, suggesting that such experiences are not typically very harmful.  • After general family problems had been statistically controlled  for, the small association between CSA and adult problems was reduced to essentially zero, suggesting that the negative family environment in which child sexual abuse often occurs, rather than the sexual abuse per se, might explain much of the link between CSA and later problems. Indeed, poor family environ- ment predicted adjustment problems an average of nine times more strongly than CSA did (Rind & Tromovitch, 2007).  • Incest (sex with relatives) and forced sex were both associated  with more problems than sex between nominally consenting, nonrelated individuals.  • Age at which CSA was experienced was unrelated to adult  outcome. At first, the study’s provocative conclusions attracted little at- tention. However, after the conservative radio personality Dr. Laura Schlessinger learned of the study, she incited a firestorm of controversy. Both Dr. Laura and other critics accused Rind and his coauthors of giving comfort to child molesters and be- ing insensitive to victims of CSA. The controversy culminated in 1999 with a resolution by the U.S. House of Representatives that condemned the study (Lilienfeld, 2002; Rind et al., 2000). Rind’s study was attacked on two general grounds: First, some argued that it is socially dangerous to make the kinds of claims that the authors make in their article (Ondersma et al., 2001). Second, some argued that the study was not strong enough, sci- entifically, to justify such risky conclusions. Let us examine both criticisms. Clearly, it would be wrong to understate the harm of CSA. Vic- tims of CSA would suffer from having their pain unappreciated, and we may well invest too little in solving problems related to CSA. But overstating the harm of CSA may also entail significant costs. For example, people who are led to believe that they have been gravely and permanently harmed by CSA may suffer unnecessarily if CSA actually does not invariably have grave and permanent consequences. If CSA is often not very harmful, we need to know that. Assessing the validity of Rind’s study is a scientific matter.  Psychological Bulletin   published a lengthy scientific critique of Rind’s study (Dallam et al., 2001) along with a reply by Rind and his coauthors (2001). One criticism of the original study was that it relied on college students, who may be unrepresentative. Perhaps they were able to attend college despite CSA because they were especially resilient. However, in another study, Rind analyzed data from community samples (samples not selected on the basis of educational attainment) and got virtually identical results (Rind & Tromovitch, 1997). Some of Rind’s statistical de- cisions and analyses have also been criticized, but he has shown that his results do not change much when he analyzes the data the way his critics would. A later meta-analysis of a large representative group of nearly 1,800 adult Australians (ages 18 to 59) reported that CSA in women is associated with their having more symptoms of sexual dysfunction in adulthood (Najman et al., 2005). However, a later reanalysis of these data by Rind and Tromovitch (2007) showed that the magnitude of this relationship was quite small (similar to that in Rind et al.’s 1998 study). Moreover, Najman and col- leagues did not statistically control for other important factors, such as poor family environment, that were shown to be even more important in Rind et al.’s 1998 study Rind (2003, 2004) also extended his discussion to the issue of how harmful   adult– adolescent   sexual relationships are. The current American view, which has spread throughout the Western world, is that such relations are by definition also “childhood sexual abuse” even though marriages involving young teenagers were common in previous centuries. He reviewed evidence showing that cur- rent views on this topic are driven by ideology and moral panic rather than by any empirical research showing these experiences to be harmful—especially those between adolescent boys and adult females, where considerable evidence suggests that many teenage boys see perceived benefits from such relationships regarding their sexual confidence and self-acceptance. These are obviously controversial issues that deserve additional careful research in the future. Clearly these studies do not yet definitively answer the question of “How harmful is CSA?” but future research must contend with their findings and pay close attention to the relative importance of other negative family factors that are usually highly correlated with CSA.
12.1   Why is it difficult to define boundaries between normal- ity and psychopathology in the area of variant sexuality?  •   Defining boundaries between normality and psychopathology in the area of variant sexuality is very difficult, in part because sociocultural influences on what have been viewed as normal or aberrant sexual practices abound.  •   Degeneracy theory and abstinence theory both maintained that sexual activity should only occur for purposes of procreation because wasting semen was harmful; both were very influential for long periods of time in the United States and many other Western cultures and led to very conservative views on hetero- sexual sexuality.  •   In contrast to Western cultures, in the Sambia tribe in Melanesia, homosexuality is practiced by all adolescent males in the context of male sexual initiation rites; these males transition to hetero- sexuality in young adulthood.  •   Until rather recently in many Western cultures, homosexuality was viewed either as criminal behavior or as a form of mental ill- ness. However, since 1974 homosexuality has been considered by mental health professionals to be a normal sexual variant.  12.2   What do we mean by sexual and gender variants?  •   Sexual deviations in the form of paraphilias involve persistent and recurrent patterns of sexual behavior and arousal, lasting at least 6 months, in which unusual objects, rituals, or situations are required for full sexual satisfaction. They occur almost exclusively in males, who often have more than one of them. The paraphilias include fetishes, transvestic fetishism, voyeurism, exhibitionism, sadism, masochism, pedophilia, and frotteurism.  •   Gender dysphoria occurs in children and adults. Childhood gender dysphoria occurs in children who have unbold and dys- phoria/distress about their biological sex. Most boys who have this disorder grow up to have a homosexual orientation; a much smaller number become transexuals. Prospective studies of girls who have this disorder have reported similar results.  •   Transsexualism is a very rare disorder in which the person believes that he or she is trapped in the body of the wrong sex and goes through elaborate steps necessary to change his or her sex. It is now recognized that there are two distinct types of male-to-female transsexuals: homosexual transsexuals and auto- gynephilic transsexuals, each with different characteristics and developmental antecedents. The only known effective treatment  12   summary   for transsexuals is a sex change operation. Although its use remains highly controversial, it does appear to have fairly high success rates when the people are carefully diagnosed before the surgery as being true transsexuals.  12.3   What are the three primary types of sexual abuse?  •   There are three overlapping categories of sexual abuse: pedo- philia, incest, and rape. All three kinds of abuse occur at alarm- ing rates today.  •   Pedophilia is defined as sexual interest in prepubertal children.  •   Incest involves sexual activity between blood relatives.  •   Rape describes sexual activity that occurs under actual or threat- ened forcible coercion by one person on another.  •   Treatment of sex offenders has not as yet proved highly effective in most cases, although promising research in this area is being conducted.  12.4   What is a sexual dysfunction?  •   Sexual dysfunction involves impairment either in the desire for sexual gratification or in the ability to achieve it. Dysfunction can occur in the first three of the four phases of the human sex- ual response: the desire phase, the excitement phase, and orgasm.  •   Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is diagnosed in men when they have little or no interest in sex. In extreme cases they may actually have an aversion to sexual activity.  •   Erectile disorder occurs in men who are unable to attain or to maintain an adequate erection until the completion of sexual activity.  •   Formerly called premature ejaculation, early ejaculation occurs in men who persistently and recurrently have the onset of orgasm and ejaculation occurs after only minimal sexual stimulation.  •   Delayed ejaculation refers to the persistent inability to ejaculate during intercourse.  •   Female sexual interest/arousal disorder is diagnosed in women who persistently show a lack of interest in sexual activity and/ or great difficulty getting adequately aroused enough to have an orgasm.  •   Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is diagnosed in women who have persistent or recurrent difficulties in at least one of the following four areas: 1. Marked difficulty having vaginal intercourse/penetration 2. Marked vulvovaginal or pelvic pain during vaginal inter- course/penetration attempts 3. Marked fear or anxiety either about vulvovaginal or pelvic pain or vaginal penetration 4. Marked tensing or tightening of the pelvic floor muscles dur- ing attempted vaginal penetration
key terms  autogynephilia   419  delayed ejaculation disorder   436  desire phase   431  erectile disorder   433  excitement (or arousal) phase   431  exhibitionistic disorder   412  female orgasmic disorder   439  female sexual interest/arousal disorder   436  fetishism   409  frotteurism   413  gender dysphoria   411  genito-pelvic pain/ penetration disorder   438  incest   425  male erectile disorder   434  male hypoactive sexual desire disorder   434  masochism   414  orgasm   431  paraphilias   409  pedophilic disorder   422  rape   425  resolution   431  sadism   413  sexual abuse   420  sexual aversion disorder   436  sexual dysfunction   431  sexual sadism disorder   413  transsexualism   418  transvestic disorder   411  voyeuristic disorder   412
learning objectives  13.1  What are the symptoms of schizophrenia?  13.2  What is the prevalence of schizophrenia and when does it begin? Who is most affected?  13.3  What are the risk and causal factors associated with schizophrenia?  13.4  How is the brain affected in schizophrenia?  13.5  What neurotransmitters are implicated in schizophrenia?  13.6  Why is the family environment important for the well-being of patients with schizophrenia?  13.7  What is the clinical outcome of schizophrenia and how is it treated?  Emilio: “Eating Wires and Lighting Fires”  Emilio is a 40-year-old man who looks 10 years younger. He is brought to the hospital, his 12th hospitalization, by his mother because she is afraid of him. He is dressed in a ragged overcoat, bedroom slippers, and a baseball cap, and he wears several medals around his neck. His affect ranges from anger at his mother (“She feeds me shit . . . what comes out of other people’s rectums”) to a giggling, obsequious seductiveness toward the interviewer. His speech and manner have a childlike quality, and he walks with a mincing step and exaggerated hip movements. His mother reports that he stopped taking his medication about a month ago and has since begun to hear voices and to look and act more bizarrely. When asked what he has been doing, he says “eating wires and lighting fires.” His spontaneous speech is often incoherent and marked by frequent rhyming and clang associa- tions (where sounds, rather than meaningful relationships, govern word choice). Emilio’s first hospitalization occurred after he dropped out of school at age 16, and since that time he has never been able to attend school or hold a job. He has been treated with neurolep- tics (medications used to treat schizophrenia) during his hospital- izations, but he doesn’t continue to take his medications when he leaves, so he quickly becomes disorganized again. He lives with his elderly mother, but he sometimes disappears for several months at a time and is eventually picked up by the police as he wanders the streets. (Modified from Spitzer et al., 2002, pp. 189–90.)  The disorder that Emilo has is called schizophrenia. Schizo- phrenia is a severe disorder that is often associated with consid- erable impairments in functioning. This chapter describes the pieces of the schizophrenia puzzle as we currently know them. Keep in mind from the outset that not all of the pieces or their presumed interconnections have been found, so our puzzle is far from being solved. As you read through this chapter you will learn just how complex and challenging this disorder is—not only for patients who suffer from it and for their families who try to care for them, but also for the clinicians who attempt to treat it and the researchers who are determined to understand it.  Schizophrenia  Schizophrenia   occurs in people from all cultures and from all walks of life. The disorder is characterized by an array of diverse symptoms, including extreme oddities in perception, thinking, action, sense of self, and manner of relating to others. However, the hallmark of schizophrenia is a significant loss of contact with reality, referred to as   psychosis . Although the clinical presenta- tion of schizophrenia differs from one patient to another, the case of Emilio is quite typical.  13  The internal suffering of the person with schizophrenia is often readily apparent, as are bizarre behavior and unusual appearance.
Origins of the Schizophrenia Construct  The first detailed clinical description of what we now recog- nize to be schizophrenia was offered in 1810 by John Haslam, the apothecary at the Bethlem Hospital in London, England. Haslam described the case of a patient who appears to have suf- fered from a variety of symptoms—including delusions—that are typical of schizophrenia (see Carpenter, 1989). Fifty years later, the Belgian psychiatrist Benedict Morel described the case of a 13-year-old boy who had formerly been the most brilliant pupil in his school but who gradually lost interest in his studies; became increasingly withdrawn, lethargic, seclusive, and quiet; and appeared to have forgotten everything he had learned. Morel thought the boy’s intellectual, moral, and physical functions had deteriorated as a result of brain degeneration of hereditary origin. He used the term   démence précoce   (mental deterioration at an early age) to describe the condition and to distinguish it from the dementing disorders associated with old age. It is the German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin (1856–1926) who is best known for his careful description of what we now regard as schizophrenia. Kraepelin used the Latin version of Morel’s term ( dementia praecox ) to refer to a group of condi- tions that all seemed to feature mental deterioration beginning early in life. Kraepelin, an astute observer of clinical phenomena, described the patient with dementia praecox as someone who “becomes suspicious of those around him, sees poison in his food, is pursued by the police, feels his body is being influenced, or thinks that he is going to be shot or that the neighbours are jeering at him” (Kraepelin, 1896). Kraepelin also noted that the disorder was characterized by hallucinations, apathy and indiffer- ence, withdrawn behavior, and an incapacity for regular work. It was a Swiss psychiatrist named Eugen Bleuler (1857– 1939) who gave us the diagnostic term we still use today. In 1911, Bleuler used   schizophrenia   (from the Greek roots of   sxizo , pronounced “schizo” and meaning “to split or crack,” and   phren , meaning “mind”) because he believed the condition was charac- terized primarily by disorganization of thought processes, a lack of coherence between thought and emotion, and an inward ori- entation away (split off) from reality. Although the term is often thought to reflect a “Jekyll and Hyde” split personality, this is a major misconception. The splitting does not refer to multiple personalities (an entirely different form of disorder, now called dissociative identity disorder). Instead, in schizophrenia there is a split within the intellect, between the intellect and emotion, and between the intellect and external reality. Interestingly, the subtitle of Bleuler’s monograph (Bleuler, 1911/1950) was “The Group of Schizophrenias,” indicating that he believed this disor- der was not a single diagnostic entity.  Epidemiology  The risk of developing schizophrenia over the course of one’s lifetime is a little under 1 percent—actually around 0.7 percent (Saha et al., 2005). What this means is that approximately 1 out of every 140 people alive today who survive until at least age 55 will develop the disorder. Of course, a statistic like this does not mean that everyone has exactly the same risk. This is an average lifetime risk estimate. As we shall see later, some people (e.g., those who have a parent with schizophrenia) have a statistically higher risk of developing the disorder than do others (e.g., peo- ple who come from families where there has never been a case of schizophrenia). There are also other groups of people who seem to have an especially high risk of developing schizophrenia. For example, people whose fathers were older (aged 45 to 50 years or more) at the time of their birth have two to three times the normal risk of developing schizophrenia when they grow up (Byrne et al., 2003; Malaspina et al., 2001). Having a parent who works as a dry cleaner is also a risk factor (Perrin, Opler et al., 2007). Moreover, people of Afro-Caribbean origin living in the United Kingdom have higher-than-expected rates of schizophrenia (Harrison et al., 1997). Although the reasons for these differences are not well understood, they are of great interest to researchers. The vast majority of cases of schizophrenia begin in late adolescence and early adulthood, with 18 to 30 years of age being the peak time for the onset of the illness (Tandon et al., 2009). Although schizophrenia is sometimes found in children, such cases are rare (Green et al., 1992; McKenna et al., 1994). Schizophrenia can also have its initial onset in middle age or later, but again, this is not typical. The characteristic age of onset of schizophrenia differs in men and women. In men, there is a peak in new cases of  Children whose fathers are older at the time of their birth have two to three times the normal risk of developing schizophrenia.
schizophrenia between ages 20 and 24. The incidence of schizo- phrenia in women peaks during the same age period, but the peak is less marked than it is for men (see Figure 13.1). After about age 35, the number of men developing schizophrenia falls markedly, whereas the number of women developing schizo- phrenia does not. Instead, there is a second rise in new cases that begins around age 40, as well as a third spike in onset that occurs when women are in their early sixties (Abel et al., 2010). In addition to being more likely to have an early age of onset, males also tend to have a more severe form of schizophre- nia (Leung & Chue, 2000). Brain-imaging studies show that schizophrenia-related anomalies of brain structure (discussed later) are more severe in male patients than they are in female patients (Nopoulos et al., 1997). Gender-related differences in illness severity may also explain why schizophrenia is more common in males than it is in females. The male-to-female sex ratio is 1.4:1. So for every three men who develop the disorder, only two women do so (Aleman et al., 2003; Kirkbridge et al., 2006). If women have a less severe form of schizophrenia, and if they also have more symptoms of depression (see Leung & Chue, 2000), they may either not be diagnosed at all or else be diagnosed with other disorders, thus giving rise to the sex ratio imbalance. What might explain the better clinical outcome of women with schizophrenia? One possibility is that female sex hormones play some protective role. When estrogen levels are low (as is true premenstrually) or are falling, psychotic symptoms in women with schizophrenia often get worse (Bergemann et al., 2007). The protective effect of estrogen may therefore help explain both the delayed onset of schizophrenia and the more favorable clinical course of the disorder in females. Declining levels of estrogen around menopause might also explain why late-onset schizophrenia is much more likely to strike women than men. There is some evidence that this late-onset pattern in women is associated with a more severe clinical presentation (Haffner et al., 1998).  in review  What did Kraepelin mean by the term   dementia praecox ? How accurate is this description? What was Bleuler’s use of the term   schizophrenia   meant to convey? Is schizophrenia the same thing as split personality? What is the prevalence of schizophrenia? What groups of people show lower or higher rates of schizophrenia than expected? How does the age of onset of schizophrenia vary by gender? How does gender influence the severity of schizophrenia? Why might this be?  Clinical Picture  As we have mentioned earlier, the   DSM   is a work in progress. Diagnostic criteria are not fixed and immutable but instead change subtly over time as new research findings become avail- able. We show the current   DSM-5   criteria for the diagnosis of schizophrenia in the   DSM-5   table on page 447. These are broadly similar to those used in   DSM-IV   and to the diagnostic criteria in the ICD (WHO, 2003), which is the diagnostic sys- tem used in Europe and other parts of the world. One change that has occurred in   DSM-5   is the elimination of the require- ment that only one other symptom is necessary if delusions are bizarre or if the auditory hallucinations are of a certain type. In isolation, however, lists of symptoms convey little about the clinical essence of schizophrenia. In the sections that follow, we elaborate on the hallmark symptoms of this major form of psychotic disorder.  Delusions  A   delusion   is essentially an erroneous belief that is fixed and firmly held despite clear contradictory evidence. The word   delu- sion   comes from the Latin verb   ludere , which means “to play.” In essence, tricks are played on the mind. People with delusions  figure   13.1  Onset of Schizophrenia.   Age distribution of onset of schizophrenia (first sign of mental disorder) for men and women.  Source: From Haffner, H., et al. (1998). Causes and consequences of the gender difference in age at onset of schizophrenia.   Schizophrenia Bulletin ,   24 (1), 99–114.  15–19  Females n =   131  Males   n =   117 20–24 12–14   25–29   30–34   35–39   40–44   45–49   50–54   55–59  Percentage Age group  0 30 25 20 15 10 5
believe things that others who share their social, religious, and cultural backgrounds do not believe. A delusion therefore involves a disturbance in the   content   of thought. Not all people who have delusions suffer from schizophrenia. However, delu- sions are common in schizophrenia, occurring in more than 90 percent of patients at some time during their illness (Cutting, 1995). In schizophrenia, certain types of delusions or false beliefs are quite characteristic. Prominent among these are beliefs that one’s thoughts, feelings, or actions are being controlled by external agents (made feelings or impulses), that one’s private thoughts are being broadcast indiscriminately to others (thought broadcasting), that thoughts are being inserted into one’s brain by some external agency (thought insertion), or that some external agency has robbed one of one’s thoughts (thought with- drawal). Also common are delusions of reference, where some neutral environmental event (such as a television program or a song on the radio) is believed to have special and personal mean- ing intended only for the person. Other strange propositions, including delusions of bodily changes (e.g., bowels do not work) or removal of organs, are also not uncommon. Sometimes delusions are not just isolated beliefs. Instead they become elaborated into a complex delusional system. The next case study provides an example of this. This material was printed on a flier and handed to one of the authors by a man who appeared to be in his 30s. Any errors of grammar are errors in the original flier.  A.   Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these must be (1), (2), or (3):  1.   Delusions.  2.   Hallucinations.  3.   Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).  4.   Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.  5.   Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).  B.   For a significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, level of functioning in one or more major areas, such as work, interpersonal relations, or self-care, is markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset (or when the onset is in childhood or adolescence, there is failure to achieve expected level of interpersonal, academic, or occupational functioning).  C.   Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months. This 6-month period must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated) that meet Criterion A (i.e., active-phase symptoms) and may include periods of pro- dromal or residual symptoms. During these prodromal or resid- ual periods, the signs of the disturbance may be manifested by only negative symptoms or by two or more symptoms listed in Criterion A present in an attenuated form (e.g., odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences).  D.   Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features have been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic episodes have occurred concur- rently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if mood episodes have occurred during active-phase symptoms, they have been present for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness.  E.   The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.  F.   If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a commu- nication disorder of childhood onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if prominent delusions or hal- lucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms of schizophrenia, are also present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully treated). Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Schizophrenia   DSM- 5  The inner world of people with schizophrenia is often confused, punctuated by alien voices, paranoia, and illogical thoughts.
Are You Being Mind Controlled?   Are you being or were you mind controlled to do something very stupid? Twenty- five percent of our population have what is called electronic hearing. This 25 percent can hear a silent radio and do not hear it. You might be one. In hearing pitch the average person hears from zero to sixteen thousand cycles. Twenty-five percent can hear up to thirty thousand cycles. The silent radio can be heard by these high hearing frequency persons. The silent radio sounds the same as thoughts in their minds. This silent radio tricks these persons into every crime imagin- able. It tricks them into bad decisions, to quit jobs, to divorce, to run away, to be sheriff saled and any stupidity possible. The broadcast- ers over this silent radio are government, medical, psychiatrists, reli- gious and educational. This is an enormous budget used to destroy the innocent and helpless. The media is scared to cover this up. This minority, which can be in any ethnic or race, has lost all rights under law because the Russians do it everywhere. It is shocking to discover very large corporations and all colleges have mind control departments. If you and your family constantly make bad decisions and have ruinous problems, you probably are mind controlled. Every year these mind controlled people are going down the economic ladder as they cannot be trusted. No company knows when one will be selected as a guinea pig. Who could risk a sizeable work force of persons with electronic hear- ing for your competitor could easily wipe you out?  Hallucinations  A   hallucination   is a sensory experience that seems real to the person having it, but occurs in the absence of any external percep- tual stimulus. This is quite different from an illusion, which is a misperception of a stimulus that actually exists. The word comes from the Latin verb   hallucinere   or   allucinere , meaning to “wander in mind” or “idle talk.” Hallucinations can occur in any sensory modality (auditory, visual, olfactory, tactile, or gustatory). How- ever, auditory hallucinations (e.g., hearing voices) are by far the most common. In a sample recruited from 7 different countries, auditory hallucinations were found in 75 percent of patients with schizophrenia (Bauer et al., 2011). In contrast, visual hallucina- tions were reported less frequently (39 percent of patients), and olfactory, tactile, and gustatory hallucinations were even more rare (1–7 percent). Even deaf people who are diagnosed with schizophrenia sometimes report auditory hallucinations (Aleman & Larøi, 2008). As “The World Around Us” box on the next page illustrates, hallucinations can even be induced in healthy people if they are under a lot of stress and drink a lot of caffeine.  Watch   the   Video   Larry: Schizophrenia   on   MyPsychLab . Hallucinations often have relevance for the patient at some affective, conceptual, or behavioral level. Patients can become emotionally involved in their hallucinations, often incorporating them into their delusions. In some cases, patients may even act on their hallucinations and do what the voices tell them to do. People who consider themselves to be socially inferior tend to perceive the voices they hear as being more powerful than they are and to behave accordingly (Paulik, 2011). In an interesting study of the phenomenology of auditory hallucinations, Nayani and David (1996) interviewed 100 hal- lucinating patients and asked them a series of questions about their hallucinatory voices. The majority of patients (73 percent) reported that their voices usually spoke at a normal conversa- tional volume. Hallucinated voices were often those of people known to the patient in real life, although sometimes unfamil- iar voices or the voices of God or the Devil were heard. Most patients reported that they heard more than one voice and that their hallucinations were worse when they were alone. Most commonly, the hallucinated voices uttered rude and vulgar expletives or else were critical (“You are stupid”), bossy (“Get the milk”), or abusive (“Ugly bitch”), although some voices were pleasant and supportive (“My darling”). Are patients who are hallucinating really hearing voices? Neuroimaging studies of hallucinating patients are providing answers to this interesting question. Several research groups have used PET and fMRI to look at activity in the brains of patients when they are actually experiencing auditory hallucinations (Cleghorn et al., 1992; McGuire et al., 1996). Although it might be expected that patients hearing voices would show an increase of activity in areas of the brain involved in speech comprehen- sion (e.g., Wernicke’s area in the temporal lobe), imaging studies reveal that hallucinating patients show increased activity in Bro- ca’s area—an area of the temporal lobe that is involved in speech production. In some cases, the pattern of brain activation that occurs when patients experience auditory hallucinations is very similar to that seen when healthy volunteers are asked to imagine that there is another person talking to them (Shergill et al., 2000). Overall, the research findings suggest that auditory hallucinations occur when patients misinterpret their own self-generated and verbally mediated thoughts (inner speech or self-talk) as coming from another source. Indeed, if transcranial magnetic stimulation (in which a magnetic field passing through the skull temporar- ily disrupts activity in underlying brain areas) is used to reduce activity in speech production areas, hallucinating patients actually show a reduction in their auditory hallucinations (Hoffman et al., 2005)! Modern research approaches are thus supporting a very old idea: Auditory hallucinations are really a form of misperceived subvocal speech (Gould, 1949).  Disorganized Speech and Behavior  Delusions reflect a disorder of thought   content . Disorganized speech, on the other hand, is the external manifestation of a disorder in thought   form . Basically, an affected person fails to make sense, despite seeming to conform to the semantic and syntactic rules governing verbal communication. The failure is not attributable to low intelligence, poor education, or cultural deprivation. Years ago, Meehl (1962) aptly referred to the process as one of “cognitive
slippage”; others have referred to it as “derailment” or “loosening” of associations or, in its most extreme form, as “incoherence.” In disorganized speech, the words and word combinations sound communicative, but the listener is left with little or no understanding of the point the speaker is trying to make. In some cases, completely new, made-up words known as neologisms (liter- ally, “new words”) appear in the patient’s speech. An example might be the word   detone , which looks and sounds like a meaningful word but is a neologism.   Formal thought disorder   (a term clinicians use to refer to problems in the way that disorganized thought is expressed in disorganized speech) is well illustrated in the following example. It is taken from a letter written by a man with schizophrenia and addressed to Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands.  Disorganized Speech: A Letter to Queen Beatrix  I have also “killed” my ex-wife, [name], in a 2.5 to 3.0 hours sex bout in Devon Pennsylvania in 1976, while two Pitcairns were resid- ing in my next room closet, hearing the event. Enclosed, please find my urology report, indicating that my male genitals, specifically my penis, are within normal size and that I’m capable of normal intercourse with any woman, signed by Dr. [name], a urologist and surgeon who performed a circumcision on me in 1982. Conclusion: I cannot be a nincompoop in a physical sense (unless Society would feed me chemicals for my picture in the nincompoop book).  Disorganized behavior can show itself in a variety of ways. Goal-directed activity is almost universally disrupted in schizo- phrenia. The impairment occurs in areas of routine daily func- tioning, such as work, social relations, and self-care, to the extent that observers note that the person is not himself or herself any- more. For example, the person may no longer maintain minimal standards of personal hygiene or may exhibit a profound disre- gard of personal safety and health. In other cases, grossly disorga- nized behavior appears as silliness or unusual dress (e.g., wearing  the WORLD around us  Stress, Caffeine, and Hallucinations  D o you feel that you are under a lot of stress? Do you drink a lot of caffeinated beverages each day? If so, you may be interested in the findings from a recent study that was conducted using healthy volunteers who had no his- tory of psychiatric disorders (Crowe et al., 2011). Ninety-two participants were recruited into what they believed was a study of auditory perception. As participants entered the testing room to begin the experiment, the song “White Christmas” by Bing Crosby was playing. After the song ended, participants were given headphones and asked to listen to white noise. They were told that the White Christmas song they had just heard might be embedded in the white noise at a subthreshold level. Every time they thought they heard a fragment of the song during the 3 minutes of white noise, participants were told to note this using a hand counter. In reality, no sound fragments of White Christmas were embed- ded in the sound at all. Participants only heard white noise. However, those participants who reported that they had been under a high level of stress in the past year   and   who were high caffeine users (five or more drinks per day) reported hearing significantly more embedded song fragments than partici- pants in the low-stress and low-caffeine group did. Moreover, it was the combination of high stress and high caffeine intake that was important. In participants who reported high stress but low caffeine intake or in participants who reported low stress but high caffeine intake, the number of false alarms or “hallucinations” (hearing a song fragment that was not there) was not elevated. The associations also remained when variables such as age, creativity, social desirability, mental imagery ability, and hallucination-proneness were taken into account. Overall the results of this study demonstrate that, under certain conditions, the combination of high caffeine consumption and high stress can render normal people vulnerable to auditory hal- lucinations. Caffeine is known to increase how much cortisol is produced in response to a stressor. Caffeine consumption has also been found to correlate with hallucination proneness in other studies of healthy people (Jones & Fernyhough, 2009). It is also important to note that patients with schizophrenia typically drink a great deal of coffee. During times of high stress, this might perhaps increase their risk of having an exacerbation in hallucinatory symptoms.  The combination of high stress levels and high caffeine intake is associ- ated with hallucinations in psychiatrically healthy people.
an overcoat, scarf, and gloves on a hot summer day). Many researchers attribute these disruptions of “executive” behavior to impairment in the functioning of the prefrontal region of the cerebral cortex (Lenzenweger & Dworkin, 1998).  Catatonia   is an even more striking behavioral disturbance. The patient with catatonia may show a virtual absence of all movement and speech and be in what is called a   catatonic stupor . At other times, the patient may hold an unusual posture for an extended period of time without any seeming discomfort.  Positive and Negative Symptoms  Since the days of Bleuler, two general symptom patterns, or syndromes, of schizophrenia have been differentiated. These are referred to as positive- and negative-syndrome schizophrenia (e.g., Andreasen, 1985; Andreasen et al., 1995). Statistical procedures have further indicated that some symptoms like disordered speech and disorganized behavior that were previously thought to reflect positive symptoms might be better separated from “true” posi- tive symptoms like hallucinations and delusions. A   disorganized symptom   pattern is now also recognized (Lenzenweger et al., 1991). These symptom types are illustrated in Table 13.1.  Positive symptoms   are those that reflect an excess or distortion in a normal repertoire of behavior and experience, such as delusions and hallucinations.   Negative symptoms , by contrast, reflect an absence or deficit of behaviors that are normally present. Important negative symptoms in schizophrenia include   flat affect , or blunted emotional expressiveness, and   alogia , which means very little speech. Another negative symptoms is   avolition , or the inability to initiate or persist in goal-directed activities. For example, the patient may sit for long periods of time staring into space or watching TV with little interest in any outside work or social activities. Although most patients exhibit both positive and negative symptoms during the course of their disorders (Breier et al., 1994; Guelfi et al., 1989), a preponderance of negative symptoms in the clinical picture is not a good sign for the patient’s future outcome (e.g., Fenton & McGlashan, 1994; Milev et al., 2005). Not all negative symptoms are exactly what they seem, how- ever. Kring and Neale (1996) studied unmedicated male patients with schizophrenia while they were watching film clips. Three dif- ferent types of film clips were used, the scenes in them being very positive, very negative, or neutral in terms of the emotions they were designed to elicit in the viewers. Videotapes of how the patients looked while they were watching the films were then coded by trained raters. As might be expected, the patients with schizophrenia showed less facial expressiveness than a group of healthy controls. What   was   surprising was that when the patients were asked about their emotional experiences during the films, they reported as many emotional feelings as the controls—and sometimes slightly more. Measures of autonomic arousal also showed that when they were watching the films, the patients exhibited more physiological reactivity than the controls did. What these find- ings suggest, therefore, is that even though patients with schizo- phrenia may sometimes not look very emotionally expressive, they are nonetheless experiencing plenty of emotion.  Subtypes of Schizophrenia  There is a great deal of heterogeneity in the presentation of schizophrenia, and patients with this disorder often look quite different clinically. In consideration of this, the   DSM-IV-TR  table   13.1  Positive, Negative, and Disorganized Symptoms of Schizophrenia Positive Symptoms   Negative Symptoms Disorganized Symptoms  Hallucinations   Emotional flattening   Bizarre behavior Delusions   Poverty of speech   Disorganized speech Asociality Apathy Anhedonia  Positive, negative, and disorganized symptoms can co-occur in the same patient. This woman appears to exhibit marked social withdrawal (a negative symptom) in addition to showing bizarre behavior (a disorganized symptom).  A person with catatonia may maintain an odd position for min- utes or even hours.
DSM- 5  criteria for  Schizoaffective Disorder  A.   An uninterrupted period of illness during which there is a major mood episode (major depressive or manic) concur- rent with Criterion A of schizophrenia.  Note:   The major depressive episode must include Criterion A1: Depressed mood.  B.   Delusions or hallucinations for 2 or more weeks in the absence of a major mood episode (depressive or manic) during the lifetime duration of the illness.  C.   Symptoms that meet criteria for a major mood episode are present for the majority of the total duration of the active and residual portions of the illness.  D.   The disturbance is not attributable to the effects of a sub- stance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  recognized several subtypes of schizophrenia. The most clini- cally meaningful of these were   paranoid schizophrenia   (where the clinical picture is dominated by absurd and illogical beliefs that are often highly elaborated and organized into a coherent, though delusional, framework),   disorganized schizophrenia  (which is characterized by disorganized speech, disorganized behavior, and flat or inappropriate affect) and   catatonic schizo- phrenia   (which involves pronounced motor signs that reflect great excitement or stupor). Unfortunately, research using the subtyping approach did not yielded major insights into the eti- ology or treatment of the disorder. Reflecting this, subtypes of schizophrenia are no longer included in   DSM-5 .  Other Psychotic Disorders SCHizOAFFECtivE DiSOrDEr   The   DSM-5   recognizes a diag- nostic category called   schizoaffective disorder   (see the   DSM-5  table for diagnostic criteria). This diagnosis is conceptually something of a hybrid, in that it is used to describe people who have features of schizophrenia and severe mood disorder. In other words, the person not only has psychotic symptoms that meet criteria for schizophrenia but also has marked changes in mood for a substantial amount of time. Because mood dis- orders can be unipolar or bipolar in type, these are recognized as subtypes of schizoaffective disorder. The reliability of schizoaffective disorder tends to be quite poor, and clinicians often do not agree about who meets the criteria for the diagnosis (Maj et al., 2000; Vollmer-Larsen et al., 2006). In an effort to improve this, in   DSM-5   it is specified that mood symptoms have to meet criteria for a full major mood episode and also have to be present for more than 50% of the total duration of the illness. This clarification should help improve the reliability of this diagno- sis and possibly also decrease the number of people who receive it. In general, the prognosis for patients diagnosed with schizoaf- fective disorder is somewhere between that of patients with schizo- phrenia and that of patients with mood disorders (Walker et al., 2004). Research suggests that the long-term (10-year) outcome is much better for patients with schizoaffective disorder than it is for patients with schizophrenia (Harrow et al., 2000).  SCHizOPHrENiFOrm DiSOrDEr   Schizophreniform disor- der   is a category reserved for schizophrenia-like psychoses that last at least a month but do not last for 6 months and so do not warrant a diagnosis of schizophrenia (see the   DSM-5   table for diagnostic criteria). It may include any of the symptoms de- scribed in the preceding sections. Because of the possibility of an early and lasting remission after a first psychotic breakdown, the prognosis for schizophreniform disorder is better than that for established forms of schizophrenia.  criteria for  Schizophreniform Disorder  A.   Two (or more) of the following, each present for a signifi- cant portion of time during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these must be (1), (2), or (3):  1.   Delusions.  2.   Hallucinations.  3.   Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or inco- herence).  4.   Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.  5.   Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expres- sion or avolition).  B.   An episode of the disorder lasts at least 1 month but less than 6 months. When the diagnosis must be made without waiting for recovery, it should be qualified as “provisional.”  C.   Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features have been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if mood episodes have occurred during active-phase symptoms, they have been present for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness.  D.   The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  DSM- 5
DEluSiONAl DiSOrDEr   Patients with   delusional disorder , like many people with schizophrenia, hold beliefs that are con- sidered false and absurd by those around them. Unlike individu- als with schizophrenia, however, people given the diagnosis of delusional disorder may otherwise behave quite normally. Their behavior does not show the gross disorganization and perfor- mance deficiencies characteristic of schizophrenia, and general behavioral deterioration is rarely observed in this disorder, even when it proves chronic (see the   DSM-5   table for criteria for de- lusional disorder). One interesting subtype of delusional disorder is   erotomania . Here, the theme of the delusion involves great love for a person, usually of higher status. One study suggests that a significant proportion of women who stalk are diagnosed with erotomania (Purcell et al., 2001).  BriEF PSyCHOtiC DiSOrDEr   Brief psychotic disorder   is exactly what its name suggests. It involves the sudden onset of psychotic symptoms or disorganized speech or catatonic be- havior. Even though there is often great emotional turmoil, the episode usually lasts only a matter of days (too short to warrant a diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder). After this, the person returns to his or her former level of functioning and may never have another episode again (see the   DSM-5   table for criteria for brief psychotic disorder). Cases of brief psychotic disorder are infrequently seen in clinical settings, perhaps because they remit so quickly. Brief psychotic disorder is often triggered by stress, as illustrated in the following case.  Four Days of Symptoms and Rapid Recovery  Ronald was 32 years old and had worked successfully as a lawyer for 6 years. He was married with two young children and he had many close friends. One day he returned home early from work and was shocked to find his wife in bed with his best friend. His initial reaction was anger, followed by depression. However, within 2 days he began to hear voices that called his name and that said, “Love, love, love.” Ronald began to express odd ideas, speaking of fusing with God and dispensing peace on Earth. He also talked about needing to fight what he called the “giant con- spiracy.” During this time his affect was flat and he spoke in a slow and distinct manner. Ronald was admitted to hospital and was given medication. He and his wife also began marital ther- apy. Ronald showed rapid improvement of his symptoms and within 5 days of the onset of his initial symptoms he was back at work again. (Based on Janowsky et al., 1987)  in review  •   What are the major symptoms of schizophrenia?  •   How is a hallucination different from a delusion?  •   Explain the differences among positive, negative, and disorga- nized symptoms.  •   Why were the subtypes of schizophrenia not included in   DSM-5 ?  •   In what ways are schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder different?  DSM- 5  criteria for  Delusional Disorder  A.   The presence of one (or more) delusions with a duration of 1 month or longer.  B.   Criterion A for schizophrenia has never been met.  Note:   Hallucinations, if present, are not prominent and are related to the delusional theme (e.g., the sensation of being infested with insects associated with delusions of infestation).  C.   Apart from the impact of the delusion(s) or its ramifica- tions, functioning is not markedly impaired, and behavior is not obviously bizarre or odd.  D.   If manic or major depressive episodes have occurred, these have been brief relative to the duration of the delusional periods.  E.   The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition and is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as body dysmorphic disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  DSM- 5  criteria for  Brief Psychotic Disorder  A.   Presence of one (or more) of the following symptoms. At least one of these must be (1), (2), or (3):  1.   Delusions.  2.   Hallucinations.  3.   Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).  4.   Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.  Note:   Do not include a symptom if it is a culturally sanc- tioned response.  B.   Duration of an episode of the disturbance is at least 1 day but less than 1 month, with eventual full return to premor- bid level of functioning.  C.   The disturbance is not better explained by major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features or another psy- chotic disorder such as schizophrenia or catatonia, and is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition. Source: Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.
•   How will the change to the criteria for schizoaffective disorder in  DSM-5   improve the reliability of this diagnosis?  •   What are the major differences between schizophreniform disor- der and brief psychotic disorder?  Risk and Causal Factors  What causes schizophrenia? Despite enormous efforts by researchers, this question still defies a simple answer. In the sec- tions that follow, we discuss what is currently known about the etiology of schizophrenia. What is clear is that no one factor can fully explain why schizophrenia develops. The old dichotomy of nature versus nurture is as misleading as it is simplistic. Psychi- atric disorders are not the result of a single genetic switch being flipped. Rather, a complex interplay between genetic and envi- ronmental factors is responsible.  Genetic Factors  It has long been known that disorders of the schizophrenia type are “familial” and tend to “run in families.” There is overwhelming evidence for higher-than-expected rates of schizophrenia among biological relatives of   index   cases; that is, the diagnosed group of people who provide the starting point for inquiry (also called   pro- bands ). Figure 13.2 shows the percentage risk of developing schizo- phrenia given a specific genetic relationship with someone who has the disorder. As you can see, there is a strong association between the closeness of the blood relationship (i.e., level of gene sharing or consanguinity) and the risk for developing the disorder. For example, the prevalence of schizophrenia in the first-degree rela- tives (parents, siblings, and offspring) of a proband with schizo- phrenia is about 10 percent. For second-degree relatives who share only 25 percent of their genes with the proband (e.g., half-siblings, aunts, uncles, nieces, nephews, and grandchildren), the lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia is closer to 3 percent. Of course, just because something runs in families does not automatically implicate genetic factors. The terms   familial   and  genetic   are not synonymous, and a disorder can run in a family for nongenetic reasons (if I am obese and my dog is also obese, the reasons for this are clearly not genetic!). As we have repeat- edly emphasized, the interpretation of familial concordance pat- terns is never completely straightforward, in part because of the strong relationship between the sharing of genes and the sharing of the environments in which those genes express themselves. Although they are indispensable in providing a starting point for researchers, family studies cannot, by themselves, tell us why a disorder runs in families. To disentangle the contributions of genes and environment, we need twin and adoption studies.  twiN StuDiES   We discussed twin studies in general in Chapter 3 and again more specifically in relation to anxiety and mood disorders. As with the mood disorders, schizophrenia  figure   13.2  risk of Developing Schizophrenia by Genetic relationship.   Lifetime age-adjusted, averaged risks for the development of schizophrenia-related psycho- ses in classes of relatives differing in their degree of genetic relatedness.  Source: Compiled from family and twin studies in European populations between 1920 and 1987. From Gottesman, I. I. (1991).   Schizophrenia Genesis: The Origins of Madness  (p. 96). Copyright © 1991 by Irving I. Gottesman. Used with permission of W. H. Freeman and Company/Worth Publishers.  Relationship to person with schizophrenia  0%   50% 25% 5%   20% 15% 10%   45% 40% 35% 30%  Risk of developing schizophrenia  Nephews/Nieces Uncles/Aunts First cousins General population Identical twins Fraternal twins Children Siblings Parents Half siblings Grandchildren  12.5% 3 rd-degree relatives  25% 2 nd-degree relatives  50% 1 st-degree relatives  100%  Genes shared
concordance rates for identical twins are routinely and consis- tently found to be significantly higher than those for fraternal twins or ordinary siblings. The most famous case of concordance for schizophrenia is summarized in “The World Around Us” box, and describes the Genain Quadruplets. Although being a twin does not increase one’s risk for devel- oping schizophrenia (the incidence of schizophrenia among twins is no greater than it is for the general population), study after study has shown a higher concordance for schizophrenia among identical, or monozygotic (MZ), twins than among people related in any other way, including fraternal, or dizygotic (DZ), twins. E. Fuller Torrey is a noted schizophrenia researcher who has a sister with the disorder. He and his colleagues (1994) have published a review of the major literature worldwide on twin studies of schizophrenia. The overall pairwise concordance rate is 28 percent in MZ twins and 6 percent in DZ twins. This suggests that a reduction in shared genes from 100 percent to 50 percent reduces the risk of schizophrenia by nearly 80 percent. Also note that sharing 50 percent of one’s genes with a co-twin with schizophrenia is associated with a lifetime risk for schizophrenia of 6 percent. Although this is low in absolute terms, it is markedly higher than the baseline risk of less than 1 percent found in the general population. If schizophrenia were exclusively a genetic disorder, the concordance rate for identical twins would, of course, be 100 percent. Although MZ concordance rates vary from one twin study to another, and although some researchers report higher  the WORLD around us  The Genain Quadruplets  T he Genain quadruplets, born sometime in the early 1930s, were rare MZ quadruplets who each developed schizophrenia, an outcome that would be expected to occur by chance only once in approximately 1.5 billion births. The genetically identical girls, given the pseudonym   Genain  (from the Greek for “dreadful gene”), were hospitalized at the National Institute of Mental Health in the mid-1950s and studied intensively by lead researcher David Rosenthal (see Rosenthal, 1963; see also Mirsky & Quinn, 1988). Rosenthal also selected first names for the girls using the initials of the institution, NIMH. Accordingly, the women are known to us as Nora (the firstborn), Iris, Myra, and Hester. They are all concordant for schizophrenia. However, they are discordant with regard to the severity of their illnesses. The most severely ill Genain is Hester, who was born last and had the lowest birth weight. Hester was always the slowest to develop, and she was removed from school after 11th grade. She has never held a job outside the home and has suffered from chronic and unremitting severe symptoms since age 18. Neurocognitive testing at NIMH revealed that, along with Nora, Hester showed a great deal of evidence of brain disturbance. Nora was always considered by the family to be the best of the four girls. She had the highest IQ and was the first to get a job. Nonetheless, after she was hospitalized at the age of 22 with hallucinations, delusions, and withdrawal, she had a long history of hospitalizations and has never been able to live indepen- dently or hold a job for an extended period of time. In contrast, third-born Myra, despite having some problems in her 20s (when she was questionably diagnosed as having schizophrenia), does not appear to have experienced delusions and paranoia until her mid-40s. The only one of the Genains to marry and have children, she has a clinical picture that suggests schizoaffective disorder (a blend of psychotic symptoms and mood symptoms). Although she is not psychiatrically well by any means, she was able to go off medications and eventually went into remission. Finally, there is Iris. Like Nora, Iris had her first psychiatric hos- pitalization at age 22. She spent 12 years in a state hospital and suffered from hallucinations, delusions, and motor abnormali- ties. Although neurocognitive testing did not reveal any obvious brain disturbance, it is clear that she has suffered from a severe form of schizophrenia. Why do these identical quadruplets not have identical illnesses? We do not know. Did Nora and Hester, being born first and last, experience more traumatic birth complications? Has Iris done less well than might have been expected from her neuro- cognitive test results because her parents insisted on treating the quads as though they were two sets of twins—a superior and talented set consisting of Nora and Myra, and an inferior, problematic set consisting of Iris and Hester? Did being paired with Hester somehow compromise Iris’s development? Has Myra done so well (relatively) because she was the most favored and because she did not sustain any brain damage? And why did the quadruplets develop schizophrenia at all? In all probability, there was a family history of the disorder. Mr. Genain’s mother (the girls’ grandmother) had a nervous breakdown in her teens and appears to have had some symptoms of paranoid schizophrenia. It is also clear that the family environ- ment was far from healthy and may have provided the stress that acted on the quadruplets’ genetic predispositions to induce full- blown illness. Mr. Genain was very disturbed and spent most of his time drinking and expressing his various fears and obsessions to his family. He imposed extreme restrictions and surveillance on the girls until the time of their breakdowns. He was sexually pro- miscuous and was reported to have sexually molested at least two of his daughters. Mrs. Genain seems to have ignored the sexual exploitation occurring in the home. In short, nothing about the family environment can be considered to have been normal.
rates than the 28 percent reported by Torrey and colleagues (1994), they are never even close to 100 percent. Two conclu- sions can therefore be drawn: First, genes undoubtedly play a role in causing schizophrenia. Second, genes themselves are not the whole story. Twin studies provide some of the most solid evidence that the environment plays an important role in the development of schizophrenia. But why one MZ twin should develop schizophrenia when his or her co-twin does not is a fascinating question. A great deal of research attention is now being directed at studying people with a known genetic liability for schizophrenia. Historically, the most important subjects to study in this regard have been MZ twins who are discordant for schizophrenia. This investigative strategy was pioneered many years ago by Fischer (1971, 1973) in an ingenious study. Fischer reasoned that genetic influences, if present, would be just as likely to show up in the offspring of the twins without schizophrenia in discor- dant pairs (see Figure 13.3) as they would be to show up in the offspring of the twins with schizophrenia (because they share all their genes in common). And, in a search of official records in Denmark, Fischer found exactly that. Subsequent to this, in a follow-up of Fischer’s subjects, Gottesman and Bertelson (1989) reported an   age-corrected incidence rate   for schizophrenia of 17.4 percent for the offspring of the MZ twins without schizo- phrenia (i.e., the well MZ twins). This rate, which far exceeds normal expectancy, was not significantly different from that for offspring of the twins with schizophrenia in discordant pairs or from that for offspring of DZ twins with schizophrenia. Assuming that exposure to an aunt or uncle with schizophrenia would have, at most, limited etiologic significance, these results lend impressive support to the genetic hypothesis. They also, as the authors note, indicate that a predisposition to schizo- phrenia may remain “unexpressed” (as in the twins without schizophrenia in discordant pairs) unless “released” by unknown environmental factors.  ADOPtiON StuDiES   One major assumption that twin studies make is that any differences found between MZ and DZ twins are attributable to genes. At the heart of this assumption is the idea that the environments of MZ twins are no more similar than the environments of DZ twins. But it is very reasonable to expect that, because MZ twins are identical (and always of the same gender), their environments will actually be more similar than the environments of DZ twins. To the extent that this is true, twin studies will overestimate the importance of genetic factors (because some similarities between MZ twins that actu- ally occur for nongenetic reasons will be attributed to genetic factors). In some cases, of course, MZ twins go to a great deal of effort to try to be different from one another. The bottom line, however, is that the assumption that MZ and DZ twins have equally similar environments can create some problems when we try to interpret the findings of twin studies. Several studies have attempted to overcome the shortcom- ings of the twin method in achieving a true separation of heredi- tary from environmental influences by using what is called the  research cLOse-up  Age-Corrected Incidence Rate  Incidence is the number of new cases that develop. An age-corrected incidence rate takes into account predicted breakdowns for subjects who are not yet beyond the age of risk for developing the disorder.  figure   13.3  Fischer’s Study.   Because MZ twins have identical genes, the children of the well twin will have an elevated risk of schizophrenia even if their parent did not suffer from the disorder.  Fischer's Study  MZ twin #2 Schizophrenia MZ twin #1 Well Schizophrenia
adoption strategy. Here, concordance rates for schizophrenia are compared for the biological and the adoptive relatives of people who have been adopted out of their biological families at an early age (preferably at birth) and have subsequently developed schizo- phrenia. If concordance is greater among the patients’ biological than adoptive relatives, a hereditary influence is strongly suggested; the reverse pattern would argue for environmental causation. The first study of this kind was conducted by Heston in 1966. Heston followed up 47 children who had been born to mothers who were in a state mental hospital suffering from schizophrenia. The children had been placed with relatives or into foster homes within 72 hours of their birth. In his follow- up study, Heston found that 16.6 percent of these children were later diagnosed with schizophrenia. In contrast, none of the 50 control children (selected from among residents of the same fos- ter homes whose biological mothers did not have schizophrenia) developed schizophrenia. In addition to the greater probability of being diagnosed with schizophrenia, the offspring whose mothers had schizophrenia were also more likely to be diagnosed as mentally retarded, neurotic, or psychopathic (i.e., antisocial). They also had been involved more frequently in criminal activi- ties and had spent more time in penal institutions. These find- ings are often taken to suggest that any genetic liability conveyed by the mothers is not specific to schizophrenia but also includes a liability for other forms of psychopathology. But we must be careful about drawing such a conclusion. Heston’s study pro- vided no information about psychopathology in the fathers of the children. We therefore cannot know to what extent some of the problems the children had were due to genetic liability con- veyed by their fathers. Heston’s study began by identifying mothers with schizo- phrenia and then traced what had happened to their adopted- away offspring. An alternative approach involves locating adult patients with schizophrenia who were adopted early in life and then looking at rates of schizophrenia in their biological and adoptive relatives. A large-scale and multifaceted adoption study of this type was undertaken in Denmark, with Danish and American investigators working in collaboration (Kendler & Gruenberg, 1984; Kendler et al., 1994; Kety et al., 1978, 1994). As would be expected on the basis of a genetic model, the data showed a preponderance of schizophrenia and “schizophrenia- spectrum” problems (e.g., schizotypal and paranoid personality disorder) in the biological relatives of adoptees with schizophre- nia. More specifically, 13.3 percent of the 105 biological relatives had schizophrenia or schizophrenia-spectrum disorders them- selves. In contrast, only 1.3 percent of the 224 adoptive parents showed such problems.  tHE QuAlity OF tHE ADOPtivE FAmily   The Danish adop- tion studies did not include independent assessments of the child-rearing adequacy of the adoptive families into which the index children (those who developed schizophrenia) and the con- trol children (those who did not) had been placed. It remained for Tienari and colleagues (Tienari et al., 1987, 2000, 2004) to add this feature to their research design. The Finnish Adop- tive Family Study of Schizophrenia, as it is known, followed up the adopted-away children of all women in Finland who were hospitalized for schizophrenia between 1960 and 1979. As they grew to adulthood, the functioning of these index children was compared with the functioning of a control sample of adoptees whose biological mothers were psychiatrically healthy. Over the course of a 21-year follow-up, the index adoptees developed more schizophrenia and schizophrenia-related disorders than did the controls (Tienari et al., 2000, 2003). What sets this study apart, however, is what it tells us about the interaction between genes and environment. One measure of the family environment that the researchers looked at was communication deviance (Wahlberg et al., 1997). Communication deviance is a measure of how understandable and “easy to follow” the speech of a family member is. Vague, confusing, and unclear communication reflects high communi- cation deviance. What Wahlberg and colleagues found was that it was the combination of genetic risk and high communication deviance in the adopted families that was problematic. Children who were at genetic risk and who lived in families where there was high communication deviance showed high levels of thought disorder at the time of the follow-up. In contrast, the control adoptees who had no genetic risk for schizophrenia showed no thought disorder, regardless of whether they were raised in a high- or a low-communication-deviance family. Perhaps what was most remarkable, though, was the outcome for the high-risk children who were raised by adopted families low in communi- cation deviance. These children were healthier at follow-up than any of the other three groups! In other words, if they are raised in a benign environment, even children who are at genetic risk for schizophrenia appear to do very well. Tienari and colleague have provided further evidence of a genotype–environment interaction in schizophrenia (Tienari et al., 2004). (If you are unsure what these terms mean, check  Even if children are at genetic high risk for schizophrenia they are less likely to develop the disorder if they are raised in a healthy family environment.
back to Chapter 3.) Using interviews, the researchers first looked at the quality of the family environment in which the adopted children were raised. They then looked at what happened to the children who were raised in healthy versus dysfunctional families. The degree of adversity in the family environment predicted later problems in the adopted children. However, only those children who were raised in dysfunctional families   and   had high genetic risk for schizophrenia went on to develop schizophrenia-related disorders themselves. Children at high genetic risk who were raised in healthy family environments did not develop problems any more frequently than did children at low genetic risk. These findings are important because they suggest that our genetic makeup may control how sensitive we are to certain aspects of our environments. If we have no genetic risk, certain kinds of environmental influences may not affect us very much. But if we have high genetic risk, we may be much more vulner- able to certain types of environmental risks such as high com- munication deviance or adverse family environments. Findings such as these also raise the exciting possibility that certain kinds of environments may protect people with a genetic susceptibility to schizophrenia from ever developing the illness. In summary, these findings indicate a strong interaction between genetic vulnerability and an unfavorable family environ- ment in the causal pathway leading to schizophrenia. Of course, it could be argued that the children who went on to develop problems caused the disorganization of their adoptive families. However, there is little support for this alternative interpretation (see Tienari et al., 2004; Wahlberg et al., 1997). Some indepen- dent work reported by Kinney and colleagues (1997) also fails to show diminished mental health in adoptive parents raising chil- dren who later developed schizophrenia. Everything considered, the Finnish Adoptive Family Study has provided strong confir- mation of the diathesis-stress model as it applies to the origins of schizophrenia.  mOlECulAr GENEtiCS   Family studies tell us that schizo- phrenia runs in families, and twin and adoption studies help us explore the relative contributions of genes and environment. These approaches also tell us about the genetic heterogeneity of schizophrenia. For example, in addition to higher rates of schizo- phrenia, higher rates of schizotypal personality disorder are also found in the relatives of patients with schizophrenia (Kendler et al., 1993). This supports the idea of the schizophrenia spec- trum and suggests that a genetic liability to schizophrenia can sometimes manifest itself in a form of pathology that is “schizophrenia-like” but not exactly schizophrenia itself (see Lenzenweger, 2010). Researchers no longer believe that schizophrenia will, like Huntington’s disease (see  4), be explained by one mutated gene on one specific chromosome. Rather, in most cases, schizophrenia probably involves many genes working together to confer susceptibility to the illness. The individual’s “dose” of schizophrenia genes may explain why one person develops schizophrenia and another develops a milder variant within the schizophrenia spectrum, such as schizotypal personal- ity disorder. Researchers are now trying to locate and identify the genes that are involved in schizophrenia using the techniques of molecular genetics. In one approach, they are using known DNA markers to try to learn where aberrant genes might lie. As Faraone and colleagues (1999) aptly state, DNA markers are the “milemarkers” on our chromosomal highways. Molecular geneti- cists capitalize on the fact that we know the locations of some important genes that are associated with observable traits (such as genes for color blindness, for blood group, and for the human leukocyte antigen). Because genes that are close together on the same chromosome tend to stay together when genetic informa- tion is shuffled (as happens during reproduction), researchers can see whether a disorder like schizophrenia tends to co-occur with any known DNA marker traits. This is the rationale behind  linkage analysis . Linkage analysis has been very successful in helping locate the genes associated with diseases that have well- defined models of inheritance. Even newer approaches such as  genome-wide association methods   (which may be able to detect genes that have very small effects) are also now being used to identify susceptibility genes. In much of the research to date, failures to replicate previ- ously reported findings have been more the rule than the excep- tion. Nonetheless, studies are suggesting specific regions on certain chromosomes that may contribute to schizophrenia. Cur- rently, there is a great deal of interest in regions on chromosomes 1, 2, 6, 8, 13, and 22 among others (Karoutzou et al., 2008;  Many genes, each with a small effect, probably contribute to the devel- opment of schizophrenia. Genes that play a role in brain development may be especially implicated.
Maier, 2008; O’Donovan et al., 2008; Pogue-Geile & Yokley, 2010; Stefansson et al., 2008). Why are these chromosomes of such interest? The reason is that, in some cases, they host genes that are known to be involved in processes that are believed to be aberrant in schizo- phrenia. These genes are known as   candidate genes . An exam- ple is the COMT (catechol-O-methyltransferase) gene. This gene is located on chromosome 22 and is involved in dopamine metabolism. As you will soon learn, dopamine is a neurotrans- mitter that has long been implicated in psychosis (impaired real- ity testing). Interestingly, children who have a genetic syndrome (called   velocardiofacial syndrome ) that involves a deletion of genetic material on chromosome 22 are at high risk for develop- ing schizophrenia as they move through adolescence (Gothelf et al., 2007). Prior to the onset of any disorder, they often report transient psychotic symptoms (such as auditory hallucinations) and have poor social functioning and reduced IQ (Debbané et al., 2006). Furthermore, as we shall see later, people with a particular variant of the COMT gene are much more likely to become psychotic as adults if they use cannabis during adoles- cence. For obvious reasons, schizophrenia researchers are very interested in chromosome 22 and in the COMT gene in their search to understand the origins of the disorder. Other genes implicated in schizophrenia are the neuregulin 1 gene (located on chromosome 8), the dysbindin gene (on chromosome 6), the DISC1 (which stands for “disrupted in schizophrenia”) gene on chromosome 1, and several dopamine receptor genes (Gejman et al., 2011; Pogue-Geile & Yokley, 2010). These genes are involved in various neurobiological processes that are thought to have gone awry in schizophrenia.  ENDOPHENOtyPES   Although we are certain that schizophre- nia has a genetic basis, we are still a long way from understand- ing which genes are involved and what effects they have. Progress has been frustratingly slow because schizophrenia appears to be very complex genetically. A major collaborative study that examined 14 genes thought to be involved in schizophrenia has found no association between these genes and schizophrenia, disappointing many researchers (Sanders et al., 2008). However, it is possible that the genes involved may have only weak effects or else may be relevant in only certain population subgroups. A robust finding in one segment of the sample could therefore be washed out in a very large and mixed overall sample (Hamilton, 2008). Another difficulty is that researchers are still not sure exactly what phenotype (i.e., measurable characteristic of inter- est) they should be looking for (remember Bleuler’s idea of “the schizophrenias”?). Because genetic analysis requires that we know who is “affected” and who is not, this is a big problem. To simplify things, researchers are now focusing on less complex and more homogenous phenotypes (such as specific symptom clusters) that may potentially be under the con- trol of a smaller number of genes. They are also exploring  endophenotypes —discrete, stable, and measurable traits that are thought to be under genetic control. By studying differ- ent endophenotypes, researchers hope to get closer to specific genes that might be important in schizophrenia (Gottesman & Gould, 2003; Lenzenweger, 2010). Accordingly, researchers are interested in people who score high on certain tests or measures that are thought to reflect a predisposition to schizophrenia. One example is subjects who score high on a self-report mea- sure of schizotypic traits involving perceptual aberrations and magical ideation (the Per-Mag Scale; see Chapman et al., 1982; Chapman et al., 1994). Examples of items from these scales are shown in Table 13.2. Other endophenotypic risk markers for schizophrenia include abnormal performance on measures of cognitive functioning such as tests of working memory (see Barch, 2005; Lenzenweger, 2010). By studying these traits rather than the disorder itself, researchers hope to speed up progress in the search for the genes related to schizophrenia. Major collaborative studies designed to explore different endophenotypes are now under way (Greenwood et al., 2007).  Prenatal Exposures  Whether or not a genotype is expressed depends on biological and environmental triggers. We now know that a range of envi- ronmental factors, including such things as maternal exposure to stress, are capable of influencing patterns of gene expression in the developing offspring. In the sections below we highlight some environmental risk factors that might either cause schizo- phrenia or trigger it in a genetically vulnerable person.  virAl iNFECtiON   The idea that schizophrenia might result from some kind of virus is not new. Kraepelin (1919) sug- gests that “infections in the years of development might have a causal significance” for schizophrenia. We also know that in the  table   13.2  Sample items measuring Psychosis-Proneness magical ideation  T   F   Things seem to be in different places when I get home, even though no one has been there. T   F   I have sometimes felt that strangers were read- ing my mind. T   F   At times, I have felt that a professor’s lecture was meant especially for me.  Perceptual Aberration  T   F   Sometimes people whom I know well begin to look like strangers. T   F   Ordinary colors sometimes seem much too bright for me. T   F   Now and then, when I look in the mirror, my face seems quite different than usual. Sources: Eckbald & Chapman (1983); Chapman et al. (1978). Answering “true” to these items is more indicative of psychosis–proneness.
Northern Hemisphere, more people with schizophrenia are born between January and March than would be expected by chance (Waddington et al., 1999). Could some seasonal factor, such as a virus, be implicated? In 1957 there was a major epidemic of influenza in Finland. Studying the residents of Helsinki, Mednick and colleagues (1988) found elevated rates of schizophrenia in children born to mothers who had been in their second trimester of pregnancy at the time of the influenza epidemic. The link between maternal influenza and subsequent schizophrenia in the grown offspring has now been well replicated using influenza epidemic infor- mation from other countries (see Wright et al., 1999). Risk of schizophrenia seems to be greatest when the mother gets the flu in the fourth to seventh month of gestation. Although the size of the effect is small and influenza clearly does not account for very many cases of schizophrenia, the fact that this association exists is very provocative. But how can maternal influenza set the stage for schizophrenia in a child two or three decades later? One possibil- ity is that the mother’s antibodies to the virus cross the placenta and somehow disrupt the neurodevelopment of the fetus (Wad- dington et al., 1999). Other maternal infections such as rubella (German measles) and toxoplasmosis (a parasitic infection) that occur during this time have also been linked to increased risk for the later development of schizophrenia (Brown, 2011).  rHESuS iNCOmPAtiBility   The idea that the mother’s immune system might somehow damage the developing brain of the fetus is not as far-fetched as it might sound. Rhesus (Rh) incompat- ibility occurs when an Rh-negative mother carries an Rh-positive fetus. (Rhesus-positive or -negative is a way of typing a person’s blood.) Incompatibility between the mother and the fetus is a major cause of blood disease in newborns. Interestingly, Rh in- compatibility also seems to be associated with increased risk for schizophrenia. Hollister, Laing, and Mednick (1996) have shown that the rate of schizophrenia is about 2.1 percent in males who are Rh-incompatible with their mothers. For males who have no such incompatibility with their mothers, the rate of schizophrenia is 0.8 percent—very near the expected base rate found in the gen- eral population. Hollister is another example of a schizophrenia researcher who has a family member with the disorder, in this case a sister who was Rh-incompatible with her mother. How might Rh incompatibility increase the risk for schizo- phrenia? One possibility is that the mechanism involves oxygen deprivation, or hypoxia. This suggestion is supported by studies that have linked the risk for schizophrenia to birth complica- tions. Recent research also suggests that incompatibility between the blood of the mother and the blood of the fetus may increase the risk of brain abnormalities of the type known to be associ- ated with schizophrenia (Freedman et al., 2011).  PrEGNANCy AND BirtH COmPliCAtiONS   Patients with schizophrenia are much more likely to have been born follow- ing a pregnancy or delivery that was complicated in some way (Cannon et al., 2002). Although the type of obstetric compli- cation varies, many delivery problems (e.g., breech delivery, prolonged labor, or the umbilical cord around the baby’s neck) affect the oxygen supply of the newborn. Although we still have much to learn, the research again points toward damage to the brain at a critical time of development.  EArly NutritiONAl DEFiCiENCy   Yet another piece of evi- dence that supports the idea that schizophrenia might be caused or triggered by environmental events that interfere with normal brain development comes from a tragedy that occurred in the Netherlands toward the end of World War II. In October 1944, a Nazi blockade resulted in a severe famine that affected people living in Amsterdam and other cities in the west of the country. The Dutch Hunger Winter (as it was known) continued until the Netherlands was liberated in May 1945. The population was severely malnourished during this time, and many died of starvation. Not surprisingly, fertility levels fell and the birth rate dropped precipitously. However, some children were born during this time. Those who were conceived at the height of the famine had a twofold increase in their risk of later developing schizophre- nia (Brown, 2011). Early prenatal nutritional deficiency appears to have been the cause. Whether the problem was general mal- nutrition or the lack of a specific nutrient such as folate or iron is not clear. But again, something seems to have compromised the development of the fetus during a critical stage.  mAtErNAl StrESS   If a mother experiences an extremely stress- ful event late in her first trimester of pregnancy or early in the second trimester the risk of schizophrenia in her child is increased (King et al., 2010). For example, in a large population study con- ducted in Denmark, the death of a close relative during the first trimester was associated with a 67 percent increase in the risk of schizophrenia in the child (Khashan et al., 2008). Currently, it is thought that the increase in stress hormones that pass to the fetus via the placenta might have negative effects on the developing brain, although the mechanisms through which maternal stress increases risk for schizophrenia are not yet well understood.  Genes and Environment in Schizophrenia: A Synthesis  Without question, schizophrenia has a strong genetic compo- nent. Current thinking is that genetic risk for schizophrenia emerges in one of two ways. The first is from large numbers (perhaps thousands) of common genes. The individual con- tribution of each of these genes is likely very small. However, when all of these genetic variants interact together, they set the stage for the development of the illness. The other way that schizophrenia may arise is because of very rare genetic muta- tions. These could be highly specific to certain people or to certain families (see Crow, 2007; McClellan, Susser, & King, 2007). These genetic events might involve microdeletions (bits of the DNA sequence that are missing in some places) or
problems in the DNA sequence itself (such as repetitions of spe- cific sections; St. Clair, 2009). It is also possible that the focus on MZ concordance rates has caused us to overestimate the heritability of schizophre- nia. This is because some MZ, and all DZ, twins do not have equally similar prenatal environments. Around two-thirds of MZ embryos are monochorionic, which means they share a placenta and blood supply. The remaining MZ twins and all DZ twins are dichorionic; they have separate placentas and separate fetal circulations. This is shown in Figure 13.4 above. The higher concordance rate for schizophrenia in MZ than in DZ twins might therefore be a consequence, at least in part, of the greater potential for monochorionic MZ twins to share infections. Davis, Phelps, and Bracha (1995) have found that MZ twins who are monochorionic are much more likely to be concordant for schizophrenia (around 60 percent concordance) than MZ twins who are dichorionic (around 11 percent con- cordance). The concordance figure for dichorionic MZ twins is very similar to that generally reported for DZ twins. Monocho- rionic MZ twins may therefore have inflated concordance rates in schizophrenia, which may have caused us to overattribute to genetics what might more accurately be attributed to environ- mental influences. Finally, we need to keep in mind that genes get “turned on” and “turned off” in response to environmental changes. MZ twins who are discordant for schizophrenia show differences in their gene expression (Petronis et al., 2003). Perhaps some envi- ronmental “hits” turn on the genes for schizophrenia in one twin and not in the other. And perhaps some environments can keep the genes for schizophrenia from ever being turned on at all. Unfortunately, consistent with the diathesis-stress perspective, being at genetic risk does seem to make people more susceptible to environmental insults. In a study looking at the consequences of birth complications, Cannon and colleagues (1993) found that only the people who had a parent with schizophrenia and who had birth complications later showed brain abnormali- ties in adulthood such as enlarged ventricles (fluid-filled spaces in the brain). Moreover, for people who had two parents with schizophrenia, the problems were even worse. In contrast, people with no family history of schizophrenia did not show enlarged ventricles regardless of whether they experienced delivery com- plications when they were born. The message seems to be clear: A genetic liability to schizophrenia may predispose an individual to suffer more damage from environmental insults than would be the case in the absence of the genetic predisposition.  A Neurodevelopmental Perspective  Earlier in this chapter you learned that schizophrenia typically strikes people in late adolescence or early adulthood. Yet in the sections above, we saw that some of the factors thought to cause schizophrenia occur very early in life—in some cases before birth. How can this be? Current thinking is that schizophrenia is a disorder in which the development of the brain is disturbed very early on. Risk for schizophrenia may start with the presence of certain genes that, if turned on, have the potential to disrupt the normal development of the nervous system. Exposure to environmental insults in the prenatal period may turn on these genes or may create problems in other ways, independently of genotype. What this means is that the stage for schizophrenia, in the form of abnormal brain development, may be set very early in life. Nonetheless, problems may not be apparent until other triggering events take place or until the normal maturation of the brain reveals them. This may not occur until the brain is fully mature, typically late in the second decade of life (Conklin & Iacono, 2002; Weinberger, 1987). What goes wrong? We are not yet certain. Brain develop- ment is a complex process that involves a programmed, orderly, and progressive sequence of events (Romer & Walker, 2007). Interestingly, some of the genes that have been implicated in schizophrenia are known to play a role in brain development and neural connections. (And organic solvents used in the dry cleaning business might disrupt fetal neurodevelopment and so explain why having a parent who works as a dry cleaner triples the risk of schizophrenia in the offspring.) If there were a disrup- tion in cell migration some cells might fail to reach their target destinations, greatly affecting the “internal connectivity” of the  figure   13.4  Chorionic Arrangements in twins.   (A) Dichorionic twins, who can be either dizygotic or monozygotic, have separate placentas and separate fetal circulation. (B) Monochorionic twins, who are always monozygotic, have a single placenta and shared circulation.  Source: From Davis, J. O., Phelps, J. A., & Bracha, H. S. (1995). Prenatal development of monozygotic twins and concordance for schizophrenia.   Schizophrenia Bulletin , 21(3), 357–66.  (A)   (B)
brain. Neuronal migration is known to occur during the second trimester—exactly the period in development during which the consequences of maternal influenza seem to be most devastating. If the seeds of schizophrenia are sown so early in life, can we see early indications of vulnerability to the disorder before the illness itself strikes? An ingenious series of studies reported by Walker and colleagues nicely illustrates the association between early developmental deviation and schizophrenia risk. These investigators gathered family home movies made during the childhoods of 32 people who eventually developed schizophre- nia. Trained observers made “blind” ratings (i.e., the observers were uninformed of outcomes) of certain dimensions of the emotional (Grimes & Walker, 1994) and facial expressions (Walker et al., 1993), motor skills, and neuromotor abnormali- ties (Walker et al., 1994) of these children and their healthy- outcome siblings from the same movie clips. The facial and emotional expressions and the motor competence of the “pre- schizophrenia” and the healthy-outcome children were found by the raters to differ significantly. The “preschizophrenia” children showed more motor abnormalities including unusual hand movements than their healthy siblings; they also showed less pos- itive facial emotion and more negative facial emotion. In some instances these differences were apparent by age 2. Of course, we must keep in mind that these early problems do not character- ize all children who will later develop schizophrenia. But they do tell us that subtle abnormalities can be found in children who are vulnerable to the disorder. We should also note that a major advantage of Walker’s research design was that it avoided the problem of retrospective bias. Rather than asking parents or siblings what patients were like when they were growing up, the study used home movies to provide an objective behavioral record. Another way to explore childhood indicators without the problem of retrospective bias is to use a prospective research design (see  ). Jones and colleagues (1994) and Isohanni and colleagues (2001) studied whole cohorts of children born in particular years and followed them up over time. Both groups of researchers found evidence of delayed speech and delayed motor development at age 2 in children who later went on to develop schizophrenia. Yet another approach is to follow children who are known to be at high risk for schizophrenia by virtue of their having been born to a parent with the disorder. This strategy, pioneered by Mednick and Schulsinger (1968), has led to several other studies of high-risk children (for reviews, see Cornblatt et al., 1992; Erlenmeyer-Kimling & Cornblatt, 1992; Neale & Oltmanns, 1980; Watt et al., 1984). Obviously, research of this kind is both costly and time consuming. It also requires a great deal of patience on the part of researchers because children at risk have to be identified early in their lives and then followed into adulthood. Moreover, because the majority of people with schizophrenia do not have a parent with the disorder (in fact, 89 percent of patients have no first- or second-degree relatives with schizophrenia [Gottesman, 2001]), high-risk samples are not particularly representative. Nonetheless, they have provided us with some valuable information about what people at risk look like prior to developing the full illness. One of the most consistent findings from high-risk research is that children with a genetic risk for schizophrenia are more deviant than control children on research tasks that measure attention (Erlenmeyer-Kimling & Cornblatt, 1992). Adolescents at risk for schizophrenia are also rated lower in social competence than adolescents at risk for affective illness (Dworkin et al., 1994; Hooley, 2010). Some of the social problems that these high-risk children have may result from underlying attentional problems (Cornblatt et al., 1992). Echoing the findings from Walker’s home movie study is evidence that early motor abnormalities might be an especially strong predictor of later schizophrenia. Using data from the New York High-Risk Study, Erlenmeyer-Kimling and colleagues (1998) reported that, of an initial group of 51 high-risk children, 10 developed schizophrenia or schizophrenia-like psychosis as adults. Of these, 80 percent had shown unusual motor behavior when they were between 7 and 12 years of age. In another study, adolescents at high risk for schizophrenia showed more move- ment abnormalities (e.g., facial tics, blinking, tongue thrusts) than either nonclinical controls or adolescents with personality or behavioral problems (Mittal et al., 2008). Moreover, these movement abnormalities became more marked with time and also became more strongly correlated with psychotic symptoms as the children got older. Although we might have suspected that schizophrenia would first begin to show itself via halluci- nations or delusions, it may be that the first signs of the illness can instead be found in the way that children move. This could be because movement abnormalities and psychotic symptoms share some of the same neural circuitry in the brain. Problems in this neural circuitry might show themselves first via movement abnormalities. Then, as the brain matures, problems in the same  Ratings of clips of old home movies revealed that children who went on to develop schizophrenia showed more unusual hand movements than their healthy siblings, even when they were just 2 years old. Source: Walker (1994).
neural circuits manifest themselves in psychotic symptoms (see MacManus et al., 2011; Mittal et al., 2008). The original high-risk studies have given us many insights into the problems that characterize people at risk for schizophre- nia. But researchers have now changed their strategies. A new gen- eration of high-risk studies is focusing on young people who are at clinical (as opposed to genetic) high risk. By focusing on those who are already showing some   prodromal , or very early, signs of schizophrenia, researchers are hoping to improve their ability to detect, and also perhaps intervene with, people who appear to be on a pathway to developing the disorder (Addington et al., 2007; Cannon et al., 2007). Recognizing this, the new diagnosis of  attenuated psychosis syndrome   has entered   DSM-5   as a disor- der in need of further study (see the “Thinking Critically About  DSM-5 ” box).  Structural and Functional Brain Abnormalities  Technological developments now allow us to study the brain in ways that used to be impossible. Positron emission tomography (PET), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and other even more sophisticated approaches are in wide use. They are revealing abnormalities in the structure and function of the brain as well as in neurotransmitter activity in people who suffer from schizo- phrenia. In the sections that follow we describe some of the problems in cognitive functioning that have long been known to characterize people with this disorder. We then consider what abnormalities in the structure and functioning of the brain might be responsible for these and other problems.  NEurOCOGNitiON   Schizophrenia patients experience many problems with their neurocognitive functioning (see Cornblatt et al., 2008; Green, 1997, for reviews). For example, they perform much worse than healthy controls on a broad range of neuropsy- chological tests (Heaton et al., 1994; Hoff et al., 1992; 2000). Furthermore, patients who have only recently become ill perform about the same on neuropsychological tests as patients who have been ill for many years (and both groups obviously perform worse than controls). In other words, cognitive difficulties can be seen right from the start of the illness and so are unlikely to be due to the effects of extended hospitalizations or medications.  T here was lively debate about whether a new diagnosis called attenuated psychosis syndrome should be added to the   DSM-5   (Carpenter & Van Os, 2011). In the end it was decided that the syndrome should be included in a provi- sional manner and placed in a section reserved for disorders in need of further study. But what is attenuated psychosis syn- drome and why is it such a controversial diagnosis? Attenuated psychosis syndrome is characterized by mild psy- chotic symptoms that are not severe enough to meet clinical criteria for another full-blown psychotic disorder. People with this syndrome are thought to be at risk for later psychosis. They are also experiencing some distress or disability and are seeking help for their problems. Proponents of including the syndrome in   DSM-5   argued that it would help clinicians identify these people and provide them with treatment at an early stage. This could, in theory, reduce distress in the short term and prevent the onset of a full-blown psychotic disorder in the long term. This is important because, once schizophrenia has developed, most patients are likely to experience recurring positive and negative symptoms, as well as persistent impairments in their work or social functioning for a large part of their lives (Jobe & Harrow, 2010). Although these may seem like valid reasons to include the new diagnosis, there are also arguments against doing so. The po- tential for stigma is one problem (Yang et al., 2013). Another concern is that the majority of people who are identified as being at high risk are not on their way to developing a psychotic disor- der. Addington and colleagues (2011) followed 303 young adults who were showing prodromal symptoms of schizophrenia. At the end of the follow-up period the majority of these young people (71 percent) had not made the transition into psychosis. Although the follow-up period was relatively short it seems that the false positive rate here is very high (see also Fusar-Poli et al., 2012). Another concern is that the existence of the diagnosis will in- crease the likelihood that antipsychotic medications will be used to treat it (see Weiser, 2011). But is it really appropriate and ethical to prescribe antipsychotic medications to someone who has only mild psychotic symptoms? As you have learned, second- generation antipsychotic medications are not as effective as had been initially hoped. They also appear to be associated with some very undesirable changes (such as tissue loss) in the brain (Ho et al., 2011; Lewis, 2011). When used long term, they may even perpetuate psychosis (see Unresolved Issues at the end of this chapter). Given this, it behooves us to be cautious with their use. The inclusion of attenuated psychosis in Section III of the   DSM  may be a good interim solution. It will encourage more research into this new disorder. This may help us refine and improve the diagnostic criteria that are currently being used. More research may also stimulate the development of new treatment ap- proaches capable of providing clinical benefits to patients with- out exposing them to unnecessary risks.  Thinking cRiTicaLLy about DsM-5  Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome   DSM- 5
Other cognitive deficits are also apparent. For example, when asked to respond to a stimulus as quickly and appropri- ately as possible (this is a measure of reaction time), schizophre- nia patients do poorly compared with controls (see Nuechterlein, 1977). In addition, they show deficits on the Continuous Performance Task (CPT; e.g., Cornblatt et al., 1989). This task requires the subject to attend to a series of letters or numbers and then to detect an intermittently presented target stimulus that appears on the screen along with the letters or numbers (e.g., “Press when you see the number 7”). There are also prob- lems with working memory (Barch, 2005; Park et al., 1995), which can be thought of as our “mental blackboard.” When they engage in tasks of working memory, patients with schizophrenia show less prefrontal brain activity compared to healthy controls (Cannon et al., 2005). Somewhere between 54 and 86 percent of people with schizophrenia also show eye-tracking dysfunction (see Figure 13.5) and are deficient in their ability to track a moving tar- get such as a pendulum (Cornblatt et al., 2008). This is a skill referred to as smooth-pursuit eye movement (Levy et al., 1993; Lieberman et al., 1993). In contrast, only about 6 to 8 percent of the general population shows problems with eye tracking. Espe- cially interesting is that around 50 percent of the first-degree rel- atives of schizophrenia patients also show eye-tracking problems even though they do not have schizophrenia themselves (e.g., Iacono et al., 1992; Levy et al., 1993; Sporn et al., 2005). This suggests that disturbances in eye tracking have a genetic basis and that eye tracking may represent a viable endophenotype for genetic studies. Perhaps the strongest finding in the area of neurocognition and schizophrenia, however, concerns a psychophysiological measure called P50 (see Heinrichs, 2001). When two clicks are heard in close succession, the brain (receiving the auditory signal) produces a positive electrical response to each click. This response is called P50 because it occurs 50 milliseconds after the click. In normal subjects, the response to the second click is less marked than the response to the first click because the normal brain dampens, or “gates,” responses to repeated sensory events. If this didn’t happen, habituation to a stimulus would never occur. Many patients with schizophrenia, in contrast, respond almost as strongly to the second click as to the first. This is referred to as “poor P50 suppression.” First-degree fam- ily members of patients with schizophrenia are also more likely than controls to have problems with P50 suppression (Clementz et al., 1998). It has been suggested that poor P50 suppression is the result of problems with specific receptors in the hippocam- pus of the medial temporal lobe (Adler et al., 1998). As you will soon learn, the hippocampus is one brain region that appears to be compromised in schizophrenia. Cells in the hippocampus are also especially susceptible to damage from hypoxia during brain development. Taken together, the weight of the evidence suggests that patients with schizophrenia have problems with the active, functional allocation of attentional resources. What this means is that they are unable to attend well on demand. Although many of the findings may not be highly specific to schizophrenia (some of the neurocognitive deficits can be found in patients with mood disorders, for example), it has long been suspected that attentional dysfunctions could be indicators of a biological susceptibility to at least some forms of schizophrenia (Cornblatt et al., 1992). In the following sections, we consider some of the reasons that this might be the case.  lOSS OF BrAiN vOlumE   One of the most well-replicated findings concerns the brain ventricles. These are fluid-filled spaces that lie deep within the brain. Compared with controls, patients with schizophrenia have enlarged brain ventricles, with males possibly being more affected than females (Lawrie & Abukmeil, 1998; Shenton et al., 2001). However, we must also point out that enlarged brain ventricles are apparent only in a significant minority of patients. Enlarged brain ventricles also are not specific to schizophrenia and can be seen in patients with Alzheimer’s disease, Huntington’s disease, and chronic alcohol problems.  figure   13.5  Normal and Abnormal Eye tracking of a Sinusoidal wave.   The top pattern is the target, the middle pattern is a record of normal tracking, and the lowest pattern is the kind of abnormal record produced by some patients with schizophrenia.  Source: Figure from Levy et al. (1993). Eye tracking dysfunction and schizophrenia: A critical perspective.   Schizophrenia Bulletin,   19 (3), 461–536. Used with permission of Oxford University Press.
Enlarged brain ventricles are important because they are an indicator of a reduction in the amount of brain tissue. The brain normally occupies fully the rigid enclosure of the skull. Enlarged ventricles therefore imply that the brain areas that border the ventricles have somehow shrunk or decreased in volume, the ven- tricular space becoming larger as a result. In fact, MRI studies of patients with schizophrenia show about a 3 percent reduction in whole brain volume relative to that in controls (Hulshoff Pol & Kahn, 2008). This decrease in brain volume is present very early in the illness. Even patients with a recent onset of schizophrenia have lower overall brain volumes than controls (Steen et al., 2006; Vita et al., 2006) or else show evidence of enlarged ventricles (Cahn et al., 2002). These findings suggest that some brain abnor- malities likely predate the illness rather than develop as a result of untreated psychosis or as a consequence of taking neuroleptic medications. Consistent with this, important new research shows that brain volume changes can be seen in genetically high-risk individuals as the illness is starting to develop. Indeed, it has been suggested that these changes may play a causal role in the onset of symptoms (Karlsgodt et al., 2010; Sun et al., 2009b). We also know that the brain changes that characterize people in the early stages of the illness progressively get worse with time. Cahn and colleagues (2002) measured changes in the overall vol- ume of gray matter (which is made up of nerve cells) in patients who were experiencing their first episode of schizophrenia. Thirty- four patients and thirty six matched, healthy comparison subjects received MRI brain scans at the start of the study and then again 1 year later. The results showed that the volume of gray matter declined significantly over time in the patients but not in the con- trols. More specifically, there was almost a 3 percent decrease in the volume of gray matter in the patients in the 1-year period between the first and the second scans. Figure 13.6 illustrates the progres- sive loss of gray matter over a 5-year period in another sample of adolescents with schizophrenia compared to healthy controls. Studies of more chronically ill patients suggest that decreases in brain tissue and increases in the size of the brain ventricles are not limited to the early phases of this illness. Instead, progressive brain deterioration continues for many years. Moreover, these brain changes can also be found in MZ twins where one has schizophre- nia and the other does not. The fact that brain changes are present in the discordant twin (the one without schizophrenia) suggests that they cannot be explained by the influence of antipsychotic medications and may instead be under genetic control (Brans et al., 2008; Hulshoff Pol & Kahn, 2008). Overall, the research findings  figure   13.6  Progressive Gray matter loss in Schizophrenia.   Compared with normal adolescents, young people with early-onset schizophrenia show a progressive loss of gray matter in their brains over time. MRI scans re- peated over a 5-year period show a much greater loss of brain tissue in patients with schizophrenia than in healthy controls. Gray matter loss occurs in many brain areas, beginning in the parietal cortex and spread- ing to the temporal cortex and the frontal cortex.
suggest that in addition to being a neurodevelopmental disorder, schizophrenia is also a neuroprogressive disorder characterized by a loss of brain tissue over time. Kraepelin’s use of the term   dementia praecox   may have been highly appropriate after all.  AFFECtED BrAiN ArEAS   Are there regions of the brain that are especially implicated in schizophrenia? Although much remains to be learned, there is evidence of reductions in the volume of regions in the frontal and temporal lobes. These brain areas play critical roles in memory, decision making, and in the processing of auditory information. More specifically, there is a reduction in the volume of such medial temporal areas as the amygdala—which is involved in emotion, the hippocampus—which plays a key role in memory, and the thalamus—a relay center that receives almost all sensory input (Ettinger et al., 2001; Keshavan et al., 2008; Shenton et al., 2001; Tamminga et al., 2002; Weinberger, 1997). Again, however, remember that the alterations in brain structure that are found in schizophrenia are not specific only to this diag- nosis. As you know from other chapters in this book, problems in some of these brain areas are implicated in other conditions (e.g., severe mood disorders) as well.  wHitE mAttEr PrOBlEmS   When we talk about volume loss in the brains of people with schizophrenia we are referring to the loss of brain cells or gray matter. However, evidence is growing that schizophrenia also involves problems with white matter. Nerve fibers are covered in a myelin sheath (which looks white in color in a chemically preserved brain). Myelin acts as an insula- tor and increases the speed and efficiency of conduction between nerve cells. White matter is therefore crucially important for the connectivity of the brain. If there are disruptions in the integrity of white matter, there will be problems in how well the cells of the nervous system can function. For example, imagine the prob- lems you would have in a group of networked computers if the connections that linked them were damaged in some way. Studies of patients with schizophrenia show that they have reductions in white matter volume as well as structural abnor- malities in the white matter itself. Interestingly, these abnormali- ties can be found in first-episode patients and also in people at genetic high risk for the disorder. This suggests that they are not a result of the disease itself or the effects of treatment. At the clinical level, white matter abnormalities have been shown to be correlated with cognitive impairments (Kubicki et al., 2007). In people at high risk of developing schizophrenia, white matter changes in the temporal areas of the brain also predict later social functioning (Karlsgodt et al., 2009). Another interesting recent finding is that children of people with schizophrenia, even though they are not psychotic themselves, have a reduction in the volume of the corpus callosum—a massive tract of white matter fibers that connects the two hemispheres of the brain (Francis et al., 2011). Although much remains to be learned, it is becoming increasingly clear that abnormalities in white matter, and in white matter development, may provide us with important additional insights into what goes wrong with the brain in schizophrenia.  BrAiN FuNCtiONiNG   Studies of brain functioning tell us what is going on in the working brain, either when it is engaged in a task or at rest. You have already learned about the structural brain abnormalities associated with schizophrenia and the prob- lems that patients with schizophrenia have on various neurocog- nitive tests. Given this, you will hardly be surprised to learn that neuroimaging research is showing us just how disrupted brain functioning is in patients with this disorder. For example, some patients show abnormally low fron- tal lobe activation (known as “hypofrontality”) when they are involved in mentally challenging tasks such as the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) or in other tests generally thought to require substantial frontal lobe involvement. Essentially, this brain area does not seem to be able to kick into action when patients perform complex tasks (see Figure 13.7). In other patients, hyperactivation in frontal brain areas is found, suggest- ing that they are having to work harder to be successful on the task. In both sets of circumstances, however, the brain is not functioning in an optimal and efficient way. Impaired functioning of the frontal lobes during cog- nitive tasks is also found in patients in the early stages of schizophrenia as well as in people at high risk for developing the disorder (Fusar-Poli et al., 2007). Again, however, it is important to remember that such alterations in functioning are not characteristic of all patients (e.g., Buchsbaum et al., 1992; Heinrichs, 2001). Nonetheless, frontal lobe dysfunc- tion is believed to account for some of the negative symp- toms of schizophrenia and perhaps to be involved in some attentional-cognitive deficits (Cannon et al., 1998; Goldman- Rakic & Selemon, 1997).  Nerve fibers are covered in by a fatty myelin sheath, which looks white in a preserved brain (hence the term white matter). Myelin improves the electrical conductivity of nerve cells. This image illustrates white matter tracts (shown here in color for better clarity) and shows how intercon- nected the brain is.
Dysfunction of the temporal lobe is also found, although here the findings are often not very consistent (Keshavan et al., 2008). However, what may be most important is that there may be a problem with the way activity in different brain regions gets   coordinated . When we are at rest or relaxing there is activa- tion in a network of brain regions that comprise the “default mode network.” You can think of this as the brain on standby. Then, when we are actively engaged in a task, activity in this network of brain areas has to be suppressed in favor of activity in brain areas that are relevant to the task at hand. But imagine what might happen if it was difficult to disengage from the default mode. Performance on the task would suffer. This is what researchers now think may be happening in people with schizophrenia. Whereas healthy people find it easy to suppress activity in the default mode network (tuning their brains into the “correct station” so to speak), people with schizophrenia may not be able to do this as efficiently (Guerrero-Pedrazza et al., 2011; Whitfield-Gabrieli et al., 2009). This lack of ability to disengage the default mode network may help us understand why people with schizophrenia have so many difficulties with a wide range of tasks across a broad array of areas (Karlsgodt et al., 2010).  CytOArCHitECturE   As we have seen, one hypothesis about schizophrenia is that genetic vulnerabilities, perhaps combined with prenatal insults, can lead to disruption of the migration of neurons in the brain. If this is true, some cells will fail to arrive at their final destinations, and the overall organization of cells in the brain (the brain’s   cytoarchitecture ) will be compromised. This is illustrated in Figure 13.8. There are also other ways in which the organization of cells in the brain appears to be disrupted. Some researchers, using complex, three-dimensional counting techniques, have reported an increase in neuronal density in some areas of the brains of patients with schizophrenia (see Selemon, 2004). There are also abnormalities in the distribution of cells in different layers of the cortex and hippocampus (Arnold, 2000; Kalus et al., 1997; Selemon et al., 1995), as well as evidence that patients with schizophrenia are missing particular types of neurons known as “inhibitory interneurons” (Benes & Berretta, 2001). These neurons are responsible for regulating the excitability of other neurons. Their absence may mean that bursts of activity by excit- atory neurons in the brain go unchecked. Again, research sug- gests that the brains of patients with schizophrenia may be less able to regulate or dampen down overactivity in certain key neu- ral circuits (see Daskalakis et al., 2002). As we will see shortly, patients with schizophrenia have difficulty handling even normal levels of stress. Given what we have just learned, this makes a great deal of sense.  BrAiN DEvElOPmENt iN ADOlESCENCE   Although we have every reason to believe that risk genes and early prenatal experiences compromise brain development in the fetus, the story may not end so early. The brain continues to develop and  figure   13.7  the Brain in Schizophrenia.   Many brain regions and systems operate abnormally in schizophrenia, including those highlighted here.  THE BRAIN IN SCHIZOPHRENIA BASAL GANGLIA  Involved in movement and emotions and in integrating sensory information. Abnormal functioning in schizophrenia is thought to contribute to paranoia and hallucinations. (Excessive blockade of dopamine receptors in the basal ganglia by traditional antipsychotic medicines leads to motor side effects.)  FRONTAL LOBE  Critical to problem solving, insight, and other high-level reasoning. Perturbations in schizophrenia lead to difficulty in planning actions and organizing thoughts.  LIMBIC SYSTEM  Involved in emotion. Disturbances are thought to contribute to the agitation frequently seen in schizophrenia.  AUDITORY SYSTEM  Enables humans to hear and understand speech. In schizophrenia, overactivity of the speech area (called Wernicke's area) can create auditory hallucinations– the misperception that internally generated thoughts are real voices coming from the outside.  OCCIPITAL LOBE  Processes information about the visual world. People with schizophrenia rarely have full-blown visual hallucinations, but disturbances in this area contribute to such difficulties as interpreting complex images, recognizing motion, and reading emotions on others' faces.  HIPPOCAMPUS  Mediates learning and memory formation, intertwined functions that are impaired in schizophrenia.
mature through adolescence and into young adulthood. For example, we all have an excess of synapses well into our late teens. However, normal processes that occur during adoles- cence prune (or reduce) these synapses, so decreasing “neuronal redundancy.” There is also a normal reduction in gray matter volume that occurs in adolescence, as well an increase both in white matter and in the volume of the hippocampus and the amygdala. In addition, the number of excitatory synapses de- creases and the number of inhibitory synapses increases. All of these processes are thought to occur to enhance brain function overall and to make the brain more “adult” (Insel, 2010; Walker et al., 2010). But what if these processes fail to occur in a normal way? We might expect to see many of the differences (reduced gray matter volume, less white matter, reduced volume of the hip- pocampus) that we do actually see in schizophrenia. Of course, we still have much to learn. The etiology of schizophrenia is very complicated. But many of the answers lie in what goes wrong in the brain at critical periods of development.  SyNtHESiS   The brain is compromised in schizophrenia, although the compromise is often very subtle. Some of the brain abnormalities that are found are likely to be genetic in origin. Others may reflect environmental insults. For example, Baaré and colleagues (2001) used MRI to study the brains of MZ and DZ twins who were discordant for schizophrenia and then compared the results for these groups to results from a group of healthy twins. What these researchers found was that the patients with schizophrenia had smaller brain volumes than their well co-twins. What was interesting, however, was that these well co-twins also had smaller brains than the healthy control twins. Baaré and colleagues (2001) propose that genetic risk for schizo- phrenia may be associated with reduced brain development early in life. This is why the healthy twins who had a co-twin with schizophrenia had smaller brain volumes than the healthy controls. Baaré and colleagues also hypothesize that patients who develop schizophrenia suffer additional brain abnormalities that are not genetic in origin. This explains why the twins with schizophrenia had smaller brain volumes than their discordant co-twins. In people at genetic risk for schizophrenia (but not in those without genetic risk), a history of fetal oxygen deprivation has been shown to be associated with brain abnormalities in later life (Cannon et al., 2002). In other words, what we may have here is an excellent example of how genes can create an enhanced  NORMAL CYTOARCHITECTURE   ABNORMAL CYTOARCHITECTURE  figure   13.8  Cytoarchitecture and Neural Development.   The upper diagram shows examples of normal and abnormal pyramidal cell orientation in the hip- pocampus. The lower diagram is a schematic representation of stained neurons and the “downward-shift” phenomenon. Premature arrest of cell migration during development may underlie the high frequency of cells in lower regions close to white matter and their relative paucity near the cortical surface.  Source:   Figure 7.1 from Heinrichs R. W. (2001).   In search of madness: Schizophrenia and neuroscience   (p. 196). Oxford University Press. Adapted from Arnold, S. E., & Trojanowski, J. Q. (1996). Recent advances in defining the neuropathology of schizophrenia.   Acta Neuropathologie, 92,   217–31 and Kolb, B., & Wishaw, I. Q. (1996).   Fundamentals of human neuropsychology  (4th ed.). New York: Freeman.  Major brain changes take place during adolescence as the brain matures. If problems occur during this critical phase of development schizophrenia may be the result.
susceptibility to potentially aversive environmental events. More- over, even when both members of a twin pair have identical genes (as is the case for MZ twins), if only one of them experi- ences the environmental insult (i.e., a birth cord around the neck, creating hypoxia), only one twin might be pushed across the threshold into illness while the co-twin remains healthy. Finally, we emphasize that it is unlikely that schizophrenia is the result of any one problem in any one specific region of the brain. The brain is comprised of   functional circuits —regions that are linked to other regions by a network of interconnections. If there is a problem at any point in the circuit, the circuit will not function properly. The focus now is on learning how the brain is wired and what regions are functionally linked. Research on the default mode network is an example of this. Subtle brain abnormalities in some key functional circuits (or deficiencies in the ability to switch from one functional circuit to another) may wreak havoc with normal functioning. As we gain more knowl- edge about how the brain does its job, we will understand more about how exactly the brain is compromised in schizophrenia.  NEurOCHEmiStry   After researchers discovered in 1943 that LSD could cause profound mental changes, those interested in schizophrenia began to consider the possible biochemical basis of the disorder. Now the idea that serious mental disorders are due to “chemical imbalances” in the brain is commonplace. This phrase is often used to provide a general explanation of why someone has a disorder like schizophrenia. But the notion of “chemical imbalance” is vague and imprecise. All it really con- veys is the widely accepted notion that alterations in brain chem- istry may be associated with abnormal mental states. The most well-studied neurotransmitter implicated in schizophrenia is   dopamine . The   dopamine hypothesis   dates back to the 1960s and was derived from three important observations. The first was the pharmacological action of the drug chlorprom- azine (Thorazine). Chlorpromazine was first used in the treat- ment of schizophrenia in 1952. It rapidly became clear that this drug was helpful to patients. Eventually, it was learned that the therapeutic benefits of chlorpromazine were linked to its ability to block dopamine receptors. The second piece of evidence implicating dopamine in schizophrenia came from an entirely different direction. Amphetamines are drugs that produce a functional excess of dopamine (i.e., the brain acts as if there is too much dopamine in the system). In the late 1950s and early 1960s, researchers began to see that abuse of amphetamines led, in some cases, to a form of psychosis that involved paranoia and auditory hallucina- tions (Connell, 1958; Kalant, 1966; Tatetsu, 1964). There was thus clinical evidence that a drug that gave rise to a functional excess of dopamine also gave rise to a psychotic state that looked a lot like schizophrenia. The third piece of indirect evidence linking dopamine to schizophrenia came from clinical studies that actually treated patients by giving them drugs that increase the availability of dopamine in the brain. An example here is Parkinson’s disease, which is caused by low levels of dopamine in a specific brain area (the basal ganglia; see Figure 13.7 on p. 466) and is treated with a drug called L-DOPA. Psychotic symptoms are a significant complication of treatment with L-DOPA. Again, then, the cir- cumstantial evidence pointed to the role of dopamine in induc- ing psychosis. How could dopamine induce psychosis? Activity in the dopa- mine system may play a role in determining how much salience we give to internal and external stimuli. Dysregulated dopamine transmission may actually make us pay more attention to and give more significance to stimuli that are not especially relevant or important. This is called “aberrant salience” (see Kapur, 2003). If this is the case, it is quite easy to see why patients might develop delusions or experience hallucinations and why psychotic experi- ences might be so shaped by the patient’s culture and history. In the early stages of their illnesses, patients often report heightened sensory awareness (“My senses were sharpened. I became fasci- nated by the little insignificant things around me”) or increased meaning in events (“I felt that there was some overwhelming sig- nificance in this”). If dopamine creates aberrant salience, the per- son will struggle to make sense of everyday experiences that were previously in the background but that now have become inappro- priately important and worthy of attention. In this way, the hum of a refrigerator could become a voice talking; or the arrival of a package could signal a threat, which then prompts the patient to look carefully at the subtle behaviors of others to see who could be a source of harm and persecution. But how might a functional excess of dopamine in the system come about? One way is through too much dopamine available in the synapse (the gap between nerve cells that has to be “bridged” by a neurotransmitter for a nerve impulse to be carried from one neuron to another). This could come about by increasing the synthesis or production of dopamine, by releas- ing more of it into the synapse, by slowing down the rate at which dopamine is metabolized or broken down once it is in the synapse, or by blocking neuronal reuptake (the “recycling” of dopamine back into the neuron). Any or all of these could increase the overall availability of dopamine. There are also ways in which a functional excess of dopamine could be produced or, more accurately, mimicked. If the receptors that dopamine acts on (i.e., those on the postsynaptic membrane) are especially dense and prolific or if they are especially sensitive (or both), the effects of a normal amount of dopamine being released into the synapse would be multiplied. In other words, the system acts as though there were more dopamine available even though there really isn’t. Before the development of highly sophisticated imaging techniques, researchers interested in learning about dopamine in the brains of people with schizophrenia could use one of two approaches. They could measure dopamine in the (postmor- tem) brains of decreased patients, or they could study dopa- mine indirectly by measuring its major metabolite (what most
of it is converted into). The major metabolite of dopamine is homovanillic acid, or HVA. However, HVA is best collected in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). This requires that the patient agree to a lumbar puncture, which involves a large needle being inserted into the spine to draw off fluid. Not only is this potentially dan- gerous, it also leaves the patient with a violent headache. The early studies that examined concentrations of HVA in the CSF of patients with schizophrenia and in controls yielded generally negative results (see Heinrichs, 2001; Owen & Simpson, 1995). The same was true of postmortem studies. Researchers were forced to conclude that there was no strong evidence to support the idea that patients with schizophrenia were producing more dopamine than controls were. Research efforts therefore moved toward exploring the idea that the prob- lem lay not in overall dopamine levels (dopamine turnover) but in receptor density and receptor sensitivity. These studies were facilitated by technological developments, such as PET scans, which allow us to study the working brain and to look at the density of dopamine receptors in living patients. There are five subtypes of dopamine receptors (D1–D5). Of these, the D2 receptor is the most relevant clinically, and most of the research has focused on this. In general, postmortem studies show that there are about 1.4 times more D2 receptors in the brains of deceased patients with schizophrenia than there are in controls (Seeman, 2011). Early PET studies also found evidence for a more-than-twofold increase in D2 receptors in liv- ing patients with schizophrenia compared with controls (Wong et al., 1986; Gjedde & Wong, 1987), although some nonsig- nificant findings (Farde et al., 1987, 1990) led to a great deal of debate and controversy. Subsequent research, however, has now established that the density of D2 receptors is indeed increased in patients with schizophrenia (Kestler et al., 2001; Seeman, 2011). Although some of this increase is no doubt related to medication effects (older patients, who have taken more medications over their lives, have the highest densities of D2 receptors), medication effects do not explain all the findings. Importantly, we now have evidence that D2 receptors are also elevated in the healthy co-twins of patients with schizophrenia (Hirvonen et al., 2005). Not only does this tell us that the elevation in D2 receptors is not simply attributable to taking medications, but it also tells us that having more D2 receptors doesn’t necessarily mean that someone will develop psychosis. So what else is going on? Current thinking is that people with schizophrenia are supersensitive to dopamine (Seeman, 2011). This arises because they have greater numbers of a form of D2 receptor (called a D2high receptor) that has a very high affinity for dopamine. What is also exciting is that animal studies suggest that anoxia (oxygen deprivation) at the time of birth can lead to dopa- mine supersensitivity. What this means is that we now have a bridge between problems with dopamine system and some of the prenatal problems (e.g., birth complications) that we discussed earlier. But dopamine is not the only neurotransmitter impli- cated in schizophrenia. Before leaving our discussion of  After being synthesized, dopamine is stored until it is released into the synapse. Dopamine binds to receptors on the post-synaptic neuron (shown in blue) triggering other reactions. It is then recycled back into the neuron to be used again.   Watch   the  Video   In the Real World: Neurotrans- mitters   on   MyPsychLab .
neurochemistry, we take a quick look at another key neurotrans- mitter that is attracting a lot of attention.  Glutamate   is an excitatory neurotransmitter that is wide- spread in the brain. As was the case for dopamine, there are a number of reasons why researchers suspect that a dysfunction in glutamate transmission might be involved in schizophrenia. First, PCP, or angel dust, is known to block glutamate receptors. PCP also induces symptoms (both positive and negative) that are very similar to those of schizophrenia. Moreover, when people with schizophrenia take PCP, it exacerbates their symptoms. Second, physicians had to stop using ketamine, which is an anesthetic, because when it is given intravenously to healthy volunteers, it produces schizophrenia-like positive and negative symptoms (see Krystal et al., 2005). When given to patients whose schizophrenia is stable and well controlled, ketamine exac- erbates hallucinations, delusions, and thought disorder. But what is all the more remarkable about ketamine is that it does not cause any of these problems when it is administered to children, for whom it continues to be used as an anesthetic. This suggests that age (and brain maturity) determines whether ketamine causes psychosis. Like PCP, ketamine blocks glutamate receptors. Researchers are now exploring concentrations of glutamate in postmortem brains of patients with schizophrenia and finding lower levels of glutamate in both the prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus compared with the levels in control subjects (Goff & Coyle, 2001). Recent results from a meta-analysis further suggest that glutamate levels are also low in the brains of living patients who have schizophrenia (Marsman et al., 2011). This is exciting because, many years ago, Olney and Farber (1995) proposed that diminished activity at certain types of glutamate receptors (known as “NMDA” receptors) may not only trigger schizo- phrenia-like symptoms but may also cause the degeneration of neurons in key brain areas. In other words, if the NMDA recep- tors are not normally active (perhaps because glutamate levels are low), subtle brain damage may result. For all of these reasons, the   glutamate hypothesis   of schizo- phrenia is now attracting a lot of research attention. It is also prompting the development of new experimental drugs that might provide additional ways to treat schizophrenia. For exam- ple, amino acids such as glycine and D-serine are now being used to enhance neurotransmission at NMDA receptor sites. This research is still in its early stages; nonetheless, the initial findings look very promising (Javitt, 2008; Lane et al., 2008). Finally, does the importance of glutamate challenge the importance of dopamine in the neurochemistry of schizophre- nia? No. One action of dopamine receptors is to inhibit the release of glutamate. Simply stated, an overactive dopaminergic system could result in excessive suppression of glutamate, lead- ing to the underactivity of the NMDA receptors. The dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia is actually made all the more cred- ible by discoveries about glutamate.  Psychosocial and Cultural Factors DO BAD FAmiliES CAuSE SCHizOPHrENiA?   Years ago, parents were routinely assumed to have caused their children’s disorders through hostility, deliberate rejection, or gross paren- tal ineptitude. Many professionals blamed parents, and their feedback to them was often angry and insensitive. Mothers were particularly singled out for criticism. The idea of the “schizo- phrenogenic mother,” whose cold and aloof behavior was the root cause of schizophrenia, was very influential in many clinical circles (Fromm-Reichman, 1948). This was very distressing for families. Not only were they faced with the difficulties of coping with a son or daughter who had a devastating illness, but they suffered all the more because of the blame that was directed to- ward them by mental health professionals. Today, things are very different. Theories that were popular many decades ago—for example, the idea that schizophrenia was caused by destructive parental interactions (Lidz et al., 1965)— have foundered for lack of empirical support. Another idea that has not stood the test of time is the   double-bind hypothesis  (Bateson, 1959, 1960). A double bind occurs when the par- ent presents the child with ideas, feelings, and demands that are mutually incompatible (e.g., a mother may complain about her son’s lack of affection but freeze up or punish him when he approaches her affectionately). According to Bateson’s etiologic hypothesis, such a son is continually placed in situations where he cannot win, and he becomes increasingly anxious. Presum- ably, over time, such disorganized and contradictory communi- cations in the family come to be reflected in his own thinking. However, no solid support for these ideas has ever been reported. Instead, we have learned from past research that disturbances and conflict in families that include an individual with schizo- phrenia may well be caused by having a person with psychosis in the family (e.g., Hirsch & Leff, 1975). In other words, rather than causing the schizophrenia, family communication problems could be the result of trying to communicate with someone who is severely ill and disorganized (Liem, 1974; Mishler & Waxler, 1968). Of course, some families do show unusual communication patterns that we now refer to as “communication deviance” and which we described earlier. These amorphous and fragmented communications may actually reflect genetic susceptibility to schizophrenia on the part of the relative (Hooley & Hiller, 2001; Miklowitz & Stackman, 1992). However, as we know from the Finnish Adoptive Study, adverse family environments and communication deviance probably have little pathological conse- quence if the child who is exposed has no genetic risk for schizo- phrenia (Tienari et al., 2004; Wahlberg et al., 1997).  FAmiliES AND rElAPSE   Although schizophrenia is often a chronic disorder, its symptoms may be especially severe at some times (i.e., when there is a relapse) and less severe at other times (e.g., during a period of remission). Decades ago, George Brown
and his colleagues (1958) observed that the kind of living situa- tion patients with schizophrenia had after they left the hospital predicted how well they would fare clinically. Surprisingly, pa- tients who returned home to live with parents or with a spouse were at higher risk of relapse than patients who left the hospital to live alone or with siblings. Brown reasoned that highly emo- tional family environments might be stressful to patients. Un- like his counterparts across the Atlantic, he suspected that what might be important was not the presence of markedly disturbed or pathological patient–family relationships (although those certainly existed in some families) but something much more ordinary and commonplace. Brown’s hunch was that researchers should focus on “the range of feelings and emotions to be found in ordinary families” (see Brown, 1985, p. 22). This was an un- usual insight at the time. But viewed today in the context of the diathesis-stress model, we see just how prescient Brown was. In a series of studies, Brown and his colleagues went on to develop and refine the construct of   expressed emotion,   or   EE . Expressed emotion is a measure of the family environment that is based on how a family member speaks about the patient dur- ing a private interview with a researcher (Hooley, 2007). It has three main elements: criticism, hostility, and emotional over- involvement (EOI). The most important of these is criticism, which reflects dislike or disapproval of the patient. Hostility is a more extreme form of criticism that indicates a dislike or rejec- tion of the patient as a person. Finally, EOI reflects a dramatic or overconcerned attitude on the part of the family member toward the patient’s illness. Expressed emotion is important because it has been repeat- edly shown to predict relapse in patients with schizophrenia. In a meta-analysis of 27 studies, Butzlaff and Hooley (1998) demonstrated that living in a high-EE home environment more than doubled the baseline level of relapse risk for schizophrenia patients in the 9 to 12 months after hospitalization. More- over, even though EE predicts relapse regardless of whether the patients studied have been ill for a short, medium, or long time, EE seems to be an especially strong predictor of relapse for patients who are chronically ill. Of course, it could be that families simply tend to be more critical of patients who are more severely ill and that is why EE and relapse are correlated. However, a review of the literature provides no strong support for this assumption (see Hooley et al., 1995). Also, EE predicts relapse even when potentially important patient variables are controlled statistically (Nuechterlein et al., 1992). Finally, research shows that when EE levels in families are lowered (usually by clinical interventions), patients’ relapse rates also decrease (Falloon et al., 1985; Hogarty et al., 1986; Leff et al., 1982; McFarlane et al., 1995). This suggests that EE may play a causal role in the relapse process. But how might EE trigger relapse? There is a great deal of evidence that patients with schizophrenia are highly sensitive to stress. Consistent with the diathesis-stress model, environmental stress is thought to interact with preexisting biological vulner- abilities to increase the probability of relapse (Nuechterlein et al., 1992). We know, for example, that independent stressful life events occur more frequently just prior to psychotic relapse than at other times (Ventura et al., 1989, 1992) and may exert their effects over longer periods of time too. Furthermore, one of the primary manifestations of the stress response in humans is the release of cortisol (a glucocorticoid) from the adrenal cortex. Ani- mal and human studies show that cortisol release triggers dopa- mine activity (McMurray et al., 1991; Rothschild et al., 1985). Glucocorticoid secretion also affects glutamate release (Walker & Diforio, 1997). In other words, two of the major neurotransmit- ters implicated in schizophrenia (dopamine and glutamate) are affected by cortisol, which is released when we are stressed. Along these lines, Hooley and Gotlib (2000) have suggested that, to the extent that high-EE behaviors exhibited by family members are perceived as stressful by patients, these behaviors are likely to trigger the release of cortisol. In support of this idea, high- EE relatives have been found to be more behaviorally controlling of patients than low-EE relatives are (Hooley & Campbell, 2002). When they try to help, they seem to do so in rather intrusive ways (e.g., “She wouldn’t go to sleep so I held her head down onto the pillow”). Furthermore, controlling behaviors such as these predict relapse in patients with schizophrenia. Quite possibly, relatives’ well-meaning attempts to get patients to function better simply backfire. If patients are stressed by what their relatives do, this could increase cortisol levels, affect important neurotransmitter systems, and perhaps eventually lead to a return of symptoms. At the present time, we have no direct evidence that this happens. However, one study is worthy of note. A group of researchers studied the behavior of patients with schizophrenia when they were involved in interactions with high-EE and low- EE relatives (Rosenfarb et al., 1995). The researchers observed that when patients said something strange (e.g., “If that kid bites you, you’ll get rabies”), high-EE relatives tended to respond by being critical of the patient. What was interesting was that when this happened, it tended to be followed by another unusual remark from the patient. In other words, an increase in patients’ unusual thinking occurred immediately after the patient was crit- icized by a family member. Although other interpretations of the findings are possible, the results of this study are consistent with the idea that negative (stress-inducing) behaviors by relatives can trigger increases in unusual thinking in patients with schizophre- nia. Although we have no way of knowing what was happening to the cortisol levels of these patients, it is intriguing to speculate that increased cortisol release might somehow be involved. Researchers are now using functional neuroimaging tech- niques (see  ) to learn more directly how EE affects the brain. Recent findings show that hearing criticism or being exposed to emotionally overinvolved comments leads to different patterns of brain activity in people who are vulnerable to psy- chopathology compared to healthy controls (Hooley et al., 2009,
2010). We do not yet know if people who show this pattern of brain activation are at increased risk of relapse, although this might be expected.  urBAN liviNG   Being raised in an urban environment seems to increase a person’s risk of developing schizophrenia. Pederson and Mortensen (2001) studied a sample of 1.9 million people in Denmark, a country in which information about where people live is recorded in a national registry and people have to notify authorities when they change addresses in order to retain eligi- bility for benefits. The researchers found that children who had spent the first 15 years of their lives living in an urban environ- ment were 2.75 times more likely to develop schizophrenia in adulthood than were children who had spent their childhoods in more rural settings. Other methodologically sound studies also confirm this association (Sundquist et al., 2004). It has been estimated that if this risk factor could be removed (that is, if we all lived in relatively rural settings) the number of cases of schizo- phrenia could decrease by about 30 percent (see Brown, 2011).  immiGrAtiON   The findings showing that urban living raises a person’s risk for developing schizophrenia suggest that stress or social adversity might be important factors to consider with respect to this disorder. Supporting this idea, research is also showing that recent immigrants have much higher risks of de- veloping schizophrenia than do people who are native to the country of immigration. Looking at the results of 40 different studies involving immigrant groups from many different parts of the world, Cantor-Graae and Selten (2005) found that first-gen- eration immigrants (i.e., those born in another country) had 2.7 times the risk of developing schizophrenia; for second-generation immigrants (i.e., those with one or both parents having been born abroad), the relative risk was even higher at 4.5. In other words, there is something about moving to another country that appears to be a risk factor for developing schizophrenia. The fol- lowing case study illustrates this.  Schizophrenia in an Immigrant from China   After she lost her job, Lian, young Chinese woman, was sent by her par- ents to live in Ireland. Upon arrival, Lian lived first in a boarding house. She then moved into a house that she shared with eight other young Chinese. Lian enrolled in a language school and also began to study for a degree in business administration. She made very few friends and spent most of her time on her own reading or playing games. The people who knew her described her as being a very private person who usually preferred to be alone. Lian’s difficulties began after she learned that two young Chinese students in Dublin had died under suspicious circum- stances. She became exceedingly alarmed – so much so that she left the language school and moved back into the boarding house to be with her former landlady. She began to believe that her abdomen contained a “presence” that was living there. She also reported hearing multiple voices coming from the “presence”. These voices, which spoke both Chinese and English, included the voices of teachers from Lian’s language school, her landlady, and her family from China. Lian reported that she had received a banknote from her family and that the picture on the banknote had spoken to her saying, “You are no longer welcome here”. Lian also developed a delusion that the family who had raised her were not her real family. She rapidly cut off all contact with them and talked about wanting to find her “real mother”. Lian also said that the CIA was searching for her. When questioned about why this should be the case, she was unable to say. (Based on Feeney et al., 2002).  Why should immigration be associated with an elevated risk of developing schizophrenia? One possibility is that immi- grants are more likely to receive this diagnosis because of cul- tural misunderstandings (Sashidharan, 1993). However, there is no convincing evidence that this is the case (Harrison et al., 1999; Takei et al., 1998). Another hypothesis is that people who are genetically predisposed to develop schizophrenia are more likely to move to live in another country. However, some of the impairments associated with the early stages of schizophrenia seem incompatible with this idea because negative symptoms and frontal lobe dysfunctions may make it harder to be orga- nized enough to emigrate (see Cantor-Graae & Selten, 2005). Perhaps the strongest clue comes from the finding that immigrants with darker skin have a much higher risk of develop- ing schizophrenia than do immigrants with lighter skin (Cantor- Graae & Selten, 2005). This raises the possibility that experiences of being discriminated against could lead some immigrants to develop a paranoid and suspicious outlook on the world, which could set the stage for the development of schizophrenia. In support of this idea, the results of a prospective study show that healthy people who felt discriminated against were more likely to develop psychotic symptoms over time than were healthy people who did not perceive any discrimination (Janssen et al., 2003). Another possibility suggested by animal studies is that the stress that results from social disadvantage and social defeat may have an effect on dopamine release or dopamine activity in key neural  Patients with schizophrenia who live in families where there is a high level of emotional tension have more than twice the risk of relapse.
circuits (Tidey & Miczek, 1996). Moreover, some of these bio- logical changes could make people more sensitive to the effects of using illicit substances (Miczek et al., 2004). This is especially interesting in light of evidence linking cannabis abuse to the development of schizophrenia.  CANNABiS ABuSE   People with schizophrenia are twice as likely as people in the general population to smoke cannabis (van Os et al., 2002). This has prompted researchers to ask whether there is a causal link between cannabis abuse and the development of psychosis. A methodologically rigorous study of conscripts to the Swedish army shows that, compared to those who had never used cannabis, young men who were heavy cannabis users by the time they were 18 were more than 6 times more likely to have devel- oped schizophrenia 27 years later (Zammit et al., 2002). This asso- ciation also remained even after people who had used other kinds of drugs were removed from the statistical analysis. Other studies have now replicated this link (Arsenault et al., 2002, 2004; Fergusson et al., 2003; van Os et al., 2002) and highlighted early cannabis use as being particularly prob- lematic. For example, Arsenault and colleagues (2002) report that 10.3 percent of those who used cannabis by age 15 were diagnosed with signs of schizophrenia by age 26, compared with only 3 percent of the controls who did not use cannabis. Taken together, the research findings suggest that using cannabis dur- ing adolescence more than doubles a person’s risk of developing schizophrenia at a later stage of life. A major methodological concern in studies of this kind is whether people who are in the early stages of developing psy- chosis are more likely to use cannabis. If this were the case, can- nabis use would simply be a correlate of schizophrenia and not a cause. However, even after childhood psychotic symptoms are considered and accounted for statistically, cannabis use has still been found to be a predictor of later schizophrenia (Fergusson et al., 2003). Moreover, a meta-analysis involving 8,167 patients with psychosis has shown that those who used cannabis (but not those who used alcohol) had an earlier onset of their symptoms compared to nonusers. These findings are consistent with the idea that cannabis use might trigger or bring forward the onset of psychosis (Large et al., 2011). Of course, the vast majority of people who use cannabis do not develop schizophrenia. So can we predict who is at higher risk? Using a large population sample, Caspi and colleagues (2005) have reported that people who carry a particular form of the COMT gene (one or two copies of the valine or val allele) are at increased risk for developing psychotic symptoms (hallucinations or delu- sions) in adulthood if they used cannabis during adolescence. In contrast, using cannabis has no adverse influence on those who have a different form of the COMT gene (two copies of the methionine or met allele). This is an exciting finding because it illustrates the importance of gene–environment interactions in the development of schizophrenia (see Figure 13.9 on p. 474). Why should the val allele of the COMT gene be a risk fac- tor? We do not know exactly. However, the finding is provocative because the COMT gene (which you may recall is on chromo- some 22) codes for a protein that plays a role in the breakdown of dopamine. One of the active ingredients of cannabis (called THC) is also thought to increase the synthesis of dopamine. We further know that cannabis makes symptoms worse in patients who already have schizophrenia (D’Souza et al., 2005). So again, we have evidence of the importance of dopamine in schizophrenia and of the problems associated with cannabis use, although how everything fits together remains to be discovered. Finally, we note that new research is showing that cannabis may actually accelerate the progressive brain changes that seem to go along with schizophrenia. Rais and colleagues (2008) collected brain scan data from 51 patients with recent-onset schizophrenia and 31 healthy controls. Nineteen of the patients were using cannabis (but not other illicit drugs) and 32 patients were not. When MRI scans were conducted again 5 years later, the patients who had continued to use cannabis during this time showed more marked decreases in brain volume relative to the patients who did not use cannabis. The changes in gray matter (brain cell) volume in the healthy controls, cannabis-using patients, and patients who did not use cannabis over the 5-year period are shown in Figure 13.10 on page 474. Although both groups of patients lost more brain tissue over time than the healthy con- trols did, loss of brain tissue was especially pronounced in the patients who used cannabis. The conclusion is obvious. If you have schizophrenia, cannabis is probably very bad for your brain.  A Diathesis-Stress model of Schizophrenia  Biological factors undoubtedly play a role in the etiology of schizo- phrenia. But genetic predispositions can be shaped by environ- mental factors such as prenatal exposures, infections, and stressors that occur during critical periods of brain development. Favorable environments may also reduce the chance that a genetic predispo- sition will result in schizophrenia. As we have discussed, children  Immigration has been found to be a risk factor for developing schizo- phrenia. People who leave their native land to live in another country have almost 3 times the risk of developing schizophrenia compared to people who remain living in their home country. What factors may con- tribute to this increased risk?
figure   13.10  Brain volume Changes over 5 years in Schizophrenia Patients and Healthy Comparison Subjects.   Patients with schizophrenia who also use cannabis show more loss of gray matter over the course of a 5-year follow-up than patients who do not use cannabis or healthy controls.  Source:   American Journal of Psychiatry . Online by Rais. Copyright 2009 by American Psychiatric Association (Journals). Reproduced with permission of American Psychiatric Association (Journals) in the format Textbook via Copyright Clearance Center.  Change in Gray Matter Volume (%)  10 5 0 –5 –10 –15 –20 Healthy comparison subjects (N   =   31) Patients not using cannabis (N   =   32) Cannabis-using patients (N   =   19)  figure   13.9  Cannabis use in Adolescence and Psychosis in Adulthood in People with Different Forms of the COmt Gene.  (A) People with the val/val form of the COMT gene who use cannabis in adolescence are at increased risk for early schizophrenia at age 26. (B) People with one or two val alleles who use cannabis in adolescence also report more psychotic symptoms at age 26. Source: Figure on p. 1123 from Caspi et al. (2005). Moderation of the effect of adolescent-onset cannabis use on adult psychosis by a functional polymorphism in the catechol-O-methyltransferase gene: Longitudinal evidence of a gene X environment interaction.   Biological Psychiatry, 57 (10), 1117–27. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier .  Percent with schizophreniform disorder at age 26  5 10 15  20 0  Met/Met   Val/Met COMT genotype Val/Val (151) (48)   (311) (91)   (148) (54)  Self-reports of hallucination/delusion symptoms at age 26  1 2 3 4 5 0  Met/Met   Val/Met COMT genotype Val/Val (151) (48)   (311) (91)   (148) (54) No adolescent cannabis use   Adolescent cannabis use  (A)   (B)  at genetic risk who are adopted into healthy family environments do very well (Tienari et al., 2004; Wahlberg et al., 1997). What you should take away from this section of the chapter therefore is an understanding that schizophrenia is a genetically influenced, not a genetically determined, disorder (Gottesman, 2001). The diathesis-stress model, whose origins largely derive from schizophrenia research, predicts exactly these sorts of scenarios (e.g., Walker & Diforio, 1997; Zubin & Spring, 1977). Figure 13.11 on page 475 provides a general summary of the interplay between genetic factors, prenatal events, brain matura- tional processes, and stress in the development of schizophrenia. The bottom line is that there is no simple answer to the question of what causes schizophrenia. The etiology of this dis- order (or group of related disorders) is complicated and complex. In the case of a person who develops schizophrenia, predisposing genetic factors must have combined in additive and interactive ways with multiple environmental risk factors, some known and some still unknown, that operate prenatally, perinatally, and also postnatally (see Gottesman, 2001; Walker & Tessner, 2008). The net result of this is that brain pathways develop abnormally. It is also very likely that these same pathways can be damaged in a host of different ways (in much the same way as a car engine can be damaged by lack of oil, lack of coolant, or from using the wrong kind of fuel). In other words, lots of roads may lead to the same end point, which is schizophrenia or a schizophrenia- like illness. This helps explain why past efforts to find the single cause of schizophrenia were doomed to fail, although no one
lived in remote and forbidding institutions that they were expected never to leave (Deutsch, 1948). Dramatic improvement came in the 1950s when a class of drugs known as antipsychotics were introduced. Pharmacotherapy (treatment by drugs) with these medications rapidly transformed the environment of mental hospitals by calming patients and virtually eliminating their wild, dan- gerous, and out-of-control behaviors. A new and more hopeful era had arrived.  Clinical Outcome  Studies of clinical outcome show that 15 to 25 years after developing schizophrenia, around 38 percent of patients have a generally favorable outcome and can be thought of as being recov- ered (Harrison et al., 2001). This does not mean that patients return to how they were before they became ill, however. Rather, it means that with the help of therapy and medications, patients can function quite well. For a minority of patients (around 12 percent), long-term institutionaliza- tion is necessary. And around a third of patients show continued signs of illness, usually with prominent negative symptoms. When more stringent criteria are used to define recovery (i.e., remission of symptoms and good general social functioning with improvements in at least one of these areas lasting 2 years or more) rates of recovery are even more modest. Recent estimates suggest that they are around 14 percent ( Jääskeläinen et al., 2013). What this means is that, despite many advances in treat- ment over the last 50 to 60 years, a “cure” for schizophrenia has not materialized. Interestingly, patients who live in less industrialized countries tend to do better overall than patients who live in more industrial- ized nations (Jablensky et al., 1992). This may be because levels of EE are much lower in countries such as India than in the United States and Europe. For example, in highly industrialized cultures, more than 50 percent of families are high in EE. In contrast, stud- ies with Mexican American and Hindi-speaking Indian samples show that only 24 percent and 41 percent of families, respectively, are high in EE (see Karno et al., 1987; Leff et al., 1987). These differences may help explain why the clinical outcome of patients is different in different parts of the world. Sometimes, patients who have been very severely impaired by schizophrenia show considerable improvement late in the course of their illness. As illustrated in the case on page 476, these spontaneous improvements can occur even when there is no change in the medications that patients are taking.  mOrtAlity   The health risks of having schizophrenia cannot be understated. This is a disorder that reduces life expectancy. Recent data from the United Kingdom show that men with  figure   13.11  A Diathesis-Stress model of Schizophrenia.   Genetic factors and acquired constitutional factors (such as prenatal events and birth complications) combine to result in brain vulner- ability. Normal maturational processes, combined with stress factors (family stress, cannabis use, urban living, immigration, etc.), may push the vulnerable person across the threshold and into schizophrenia.  Genetic Factors Prenatal and Perinatal Events Brain Vulnerability Stress Psychosis Developmental Maturation Processes  could know this at the time. How we are born and how we live makes a major contribution. As one researcher has so aptly stated, “Schizophrenia may be the uniquely human price we pay as a species for the complexity of our brain; in the end, more or less by genetic and environmental chance, some of us get wired for psychosis” (Gilmore, 2010, p. 9).  in review  •   What evidence supports a genetic contribution to schizophrenia?  •   What is the dopamine hypothesis? Describe the current status of this explanation for schizophrenia.  •   What neuroanatomical abnormalities differentiate people with schizophrenia from people who do not suffer from this disorder?  •   What environmental factors are important in the development of schizophrenia?  •   Why is avoiding cannabis so important for people with schizo- phrenia?  •   Why do we believe that schizophrenia is both a developmental and a neuroprogressive disorder?  •   Why is the diathesis-stress perspective so appropriate for under- standing schizophrenia?  Treatments and Outcomes  Before the 1950s the prognosis for schizophrenia was bleak. Treat- ment options were very limited. Agitated patients might be put in straitjackets or treated with electroconvulsive “shock” therapy. Most
schizophrenia die 14.6 years earlier than would be expected based on national norms. For women with schizoaffective disor- der the reduction in lifespan is 17.5 years (Chang et al., 2011). Some of the factors implicated in the early deaths of patients with schizophrenia and schizophrenia-related illnesses are long- term use of antipsychotic medications, obesity, smoking, poor diet, use of illicit drugs, and lack of physical activity. The risk of suicide in patients with schizophrenia is also high compared to the general population, with about 12 percent of patients end- ing their lives in this way (Dutta et al., 2010). In general, overall mortality is lower in patients who are treated with antipsychotic medications compared to untreated patients (Tiihonen et al., 2011). This no doubt reflects the extent to which people who are actively psychotic are a risk to themselves.  From Impairment to Improvement   The patient is a 46-year-old man who first became ill when he was 17 years old. At the time his illness began, he was hearing voices and he had grandiose delusions. He also had delusions of being persecuted. By the time he was 30, he was living in the hospital. He experienced continuous symptoms including delusions, hallucina- tions, and incoherent speech. His self-care was also very poor. His symptoms showed only minimal improvement after he was treated with clozapine. Spontaneous clinical improvement was noted when the patient was in his 40s. He became less isolated and he began to spend more time doing activities. Although he had previously been incoherent when he spoke, he began to speak rationally, although there was still some poverty in the content of his speech. His self-care also improved. However, hospital staff still needed to prompt him to bathe and change his clothes. Source: Adapted from Murray et al., 2004.  Pharmacological Approaches  Medications are widely used in the treatment of schizophrenia. Over 60 different antipsychotic drugs have been developed. The common property that they all share is their ability to block dopamine D2 receptors in the brain (Seeman, 2011).  First-GenerAtion AntiPsychotics   First-generation   anti- psychotics   are medications like chlorpromazine (Thorazine) and haloperidol (Haldol), which were among the first to be used to treat psychotic disorders. Sometimes referred to as   neuroleptics  (literally, “seizing the neuron”), these medications revolution- ized the treatment of schizophrenia when they were introduced in the 1950s and can be regarded as one of the major medical advances of the twentieth century (Sharif et al., 2007). They are called first-generation antipsychotics (or typical antipsychotics) to distinguish them from a new class of antipsychotics that was developed much more recently. These are referred to as second- generation (or atypical) antipsychotics. There is overwhelming evidence that antipsychotic medica- tions help patients. Large numbers of clinical trials have demon- strated the efficacy and effectiveness of these drugs (Sharif et al., 2007). Also, the earlier patients receive these medications, the better they tend to do over the longer term (Marshall et al., 2005; Perkins et al., 2004). As we discussed earlier, first-generation antipsychotics are thought to work because they are dopamine antagonists. This means that they block the action of dopamine, primarily by blocking (occupying) the D2 dopamine receptors. Some clinical change can be seen within the first 24 hours of treatment (Kapur et al., 2005). This supports the idea that these medications work by interfering with dopamine transmission at the D2 receptors because dopamine blockade begins within hours after the patient is given the medication. However, it may take several weeks or even months for maximal clinical benefit to be achieved, although how a patient does on a particular medica- tion in the first 2 to 4 weeks of treatment is a good predictor of how much he or she will benefit overall (Tandon et al., 2010). First-generation antipsychotics work best for the positive symptoms of schizophrenia. In quieting the voices and dimin- ishing delusional beliefs, these medications provide patients with significant clinical improvement (Tandon et al., 2010). This comes at a cost, however. Common side effects of these medications include drowsiness, dry mouth, and weight gain. Many patients on these antipsychotics also experience what are known as   extrapyramidal side effects   (EPS). These are involuntary movement abnormalities (muscle spasms, rigidity, shaking) that resemble Parkinson’s disease. African Americans and other ethnic minorities appear to be at increased risk of extrapyramidal side effects (Lawson, 2008). Such side effects are usually controlled by taking other medications. Some patients who have been treated with neuroleptics for long periods of time may also develop   tardive dyskinesia . This involves marked involuntary movements of the lips and tongue (and some- times the hands and neck). Rates of tardive dyskinesia are about 56 percent when patients have taken neuroleptics for 10 years or more, with females being especially susceptible (Bezchlibnyk-Butler & Jeffries, 2003). Finally, in very rare cases there is a toxic reaction to the medication that is called   neuroleptic malignant syndrome   (Strawn et al., 2007). This condition is characterized by high fever and extreme muscle rigidity, and if left untreated it can be fatal.  second-GenerAtion AntiPsychotics   In the 1980s a new class of antipsychotic medications began to appear. The first of these to be used clinically was clozapine (Clozaril). This drug was introduced in the United States in 1989, although clinicians in Europe had been using it prior to this. Although initially re- served for use with treatment-refractory patients (those who were not helped by other medications), clozapine is now used widely. Other examples of second-generation antipsychotic medica- tions are risperidone (Risperdal), olanzapine (Zyprexa), quetiap- ine (Seroquel), and ziprasidone (Geodon). More recent additions include aripiprazole (Abilify) and lurasidone (Latuda). The
reason why these medications are called “second-generation anti- psychotics” is that they cause fewer extrapyramidal symptoms than the earlier antipsychotic medications such as Thorazine and Haldol. Although it was initially believed that second-generation antipsychotics were more effective at treating the symptoms of schizophrenia, recent research findings provide no support for this view (Lieberman & Stroup, 2011; Tandon et al., 2010). The exception here concerns clozapine, which does seem to be more valuable than other medications for treatment refractory patients. Nonetheless, most patients are now treated with these newer (and more expensive) medications. Although they are less likely to cause movement problems, the newer neuroleptic medications are not without other side effects. Drowsiness and considerable weight gain are very com- mon. Diabetes is also a very serious concern (Sernyak et al., 2002). In rare cases, clozapine also causes a life-threatening drop in white blood cells known as agranulocytosis. For this reason, patients taking this medication must have regular blood tests. The disappointing findings about the efficacy of second- generation antipsychotic treatments mean that there is an urgent need for innovative approaches and new medications that work better than the ones currently available. This is all the more important in light of new research showing that antipsychotic medications may actually contribute to the progressive brain tis- sue loss we see in schizophrenia (Ho et al., 2011). In the mean- time, researchers continue to seek other ways to help patients.  OtHEr APPrOACHES   At the beginning of the chapter, you learned that women with schizophrenia tend to do better than men. They have a later age of onset and, often, seem to have a less severe form of the illness. This has prompted some research- ers to explore the potentially beneficial role of estrogen in the treatment of the disorder (Begemann et al., 2012). In an interesting study, 102 young women with schizophre- nia (all of whom were receiving antipsychotic medications) were randomly assigned to one of two conditions (Kulkarni et al., 2008). Some were given a transdermal (skin) patch containing estrogen; the others received a similar (placebo) patch that contained no active ingredient. The women’s symptoms were assessed at base- line. They then wore the patches for a period of 28 days, receiv- ing new patches twice a week. At the end of the study period, symptoms were reassessed. What were the findings? Remarkably, the women who had worn the genuine (estrogen containing) patches reported signifi- cantly fewer overall symptoms at the end of the 1-month study compared to the placebo group, with the difference for positive symptoms (shown in Figure 13.12) being most striking. Overall, the results suggest that estrogen has antipsychotic effects and that providing supplemental estrogen to women with schizophrenia may give them additional clinical benefits.  tHE PAtiENt’S PErSPECtivE   Not all patients benefit from antipsychotic medications, and many who do show clinical improvement will still have problems functioning without a great deal of additional help. We must also not lose sight of what it is like for patients with schizophrenia to have to take medications ev- ery day, often for years or for a lifetime. Side effects that can sound trivial to someone on the outside can be so bad for patients that they refuse to take their medications, even when those medications give them relief from their hallucinations and delusions. Research using PET also shows that increased blockade of D2 dopamine receptors is associated with patients reporting more negative subjective experiences such as feeling tired and depressed even when other side effects (such as movement problems) are absent (Mizrahi et al., 2007). This highlights the need for better medications and for using lower dosages wherever this is clinically feasible. We also need to remember that some patients may try to avoid taking medications because, to them, needing to take medi- cations confirms that they are mentally ill. The following comes from the mother of a daughter who suffers from schizophrenia: As a parent I also know that medication is not perfect and that the side effects can be distressing. When my daughter goes back on her medication, I feel bad seeing her shuf- fling or experiencing involuntary arm and mouth move- ments. These symptoms usually subside over time; but she also gains weight, and she hates being heavy. I think she hates taking medication most of all because she is, in a sense, admitting she is mentally ill, something she very much wants to deny. (From Slater, 1986.)  Psychosocial Approaches  Medications play a central role in the treatment of schizophrenia. But they are not the only treatment approaches that are avail- able. Psychosocial treatments are also of value. Some of these approaches, which are typically used in conjunction with medi- cation, are briefly described below.  FAmily tHErAPy   The literature that links relapse in patients with schizophrenia to high family levels of EE inspired several investigators to develop family intervention programs. The idea  figure   13.12  Estrogen treatment and Positive Symptoms.   Positive symptoms at baseline (day 0) and on days 7, 14, 21, and 28 for the estrogen and pla- cebo groups.  Source: Figure 3 from Kulkarni et al. (2008).   Archives of General Psychiatry,   65 (8), 958 (Copyright © 2008). American Medical Association. Reprinted with permission.  22  21 19  Mean PANSS Positive  Symptom Score  18 16 Baseline   7   14  Day  21   28 Estrogen Placebo
was to reduce relapse in schizophrenia by changing those aspects of the patient–relative relationship that were regarded as central to the EE construct. At a practical level, this generally involves working with patients and their families to educate them about schizophrenia, to help them improve their coping and problem- solving skills, and to enhance communication skills, especially the clarity of family communication. In general, the results of research studies in this area have shown that patients do better clinically and relapse rates are lower when families receive family treatment (see Pfammatter et al., 2006). Studies done in China indicate that these treat- ment approaches can also be used in other cultures (Xiong et al., 1994). Despite this, family treatment is still not a rou- tine element in the accepted standard of care for patients with schizophrenia (Lehman et al., 1998). Given its clear benefits to patients and its considerable cost-effectiveness (Tarrier et al. 1991 calculated that family treatment results in an average cost savings of 27 percent per patient), this seems very unfortunate.  CASE mANAGEmENt   Case managers are people who help patients find the services they need in order to function in the community. Essentially, the case manager acts as a broker, re- ferring the patient to the people who will provide the needed service (e.g., help with housing, treatment, employment, and the like). Assertive community treatment programs are a specialized and more intensive form of case management. Typically, they involve multidisciplinary teams with limited caseloads to ensure that discharged patients don’t get overlooked and “lost in the system.” The multidisciplinary team delivers all the services the patient needs (see DeLuca et al., 2008; Mueser et al., 2013). Assertive community treatment programs are cost-effective because they reduce the time that patients spend in the hospital. They also enhance the stability of patients’ housing arrangements. These approaches seem to be especially beneficial for patients who are already high utilizers of psychiatric and community services (see Bustillo et al., 2001).  SOCiAl-SkillS trAiNiNG   Even when their symptoms are controlled by medications, patients with schizophrenia often have trouble forming friendships, finding and keeping a job, or living independently. How well patients do in their everyday lives is referred to as   functional outcome . (This is in contrast to   clinical outcome , which is concerned with symptoms.) Improving the func- tional outcomes of patients with schizophrenia is now an active area of research. One way to help improve the functional out- comes of patients with schizophrenia is through social-skills training. Patients with schizophrenia often have very poor interpersonal skills (for a review, see Hooley, 2008). Social-skills training is designed to help patients acquire the skills they need to function better on a day-to-day basis. These skills include employment skills, relationship skills, self- care skills, and skills in managing medications or symptoms. Social routines are broken down into smaller, more manageable components. For conversational skills, these components might include learning to make eye contact, speaking at a normal and moderate volume, taking one’s turn in a conversation, and so on. Patients learn these skills, get corrective feedback, practice their new skills using role-playing, and then use what they have learned in natural settings (Bellack & Mueser, 1993). As Green (2001, p. 139) has noted, engaging in social-skills training is a bit like taking dance lessons. It does not resemble traditional “talk therapy” in any obvious manner. Although the results of some early studies were mixed, the most recent research findings look more positive. Social-skills training does seem to help patients acquire new skills, be more assertive, and improve their overall levels of social functioning. These improvements also seem to be maintained over time. Importantly, patients who receive social-skills training are less likely to relapse and need hospital treatment (Kurtz & Mueser, 2008; Pfammatter et al., 2006).  COGNitivE rEmEDiAtiON   Earlier we described some of the cognitive problems that go along with having schizophrenia. Researchers are now recognizing that these cognitive problems are likely to place limits on how well patients can function in the community. Because of this, the neurocognitive deficits of schizophrenia are becoming targets for treatment in their own right. The search is on to develop new medications that will enhance cognitive functioning in patients (Green, 2007; Nuechterlein et al., 2008). A major treatment effort is also being devoted to   cognitive remediation   training. Using practice and other compensatory  Patients with schizophrenia benefit from psychosocial treatments. These include individual therapy, case management, cognitive remediation, and family therapy.
techniques, researchers are trying to help patients improve some of their neurocognitive deficits (e.g., problems with verbal memory, vigilance, and performance on card-sorting tasks). The hope is that these improvements will translate into better overall functioning (e.g., conversational skills, self-care, job skills, and so on). Overall, the findings give cause for optimism. Cognitive remediation training does seem to help patients improve their attention, memory, and executive functioning skills. Patients who receive cognitive remediation training also show improve- ments in their social functioning. Especially encouraging is that even when patients have been ill for many years, they still seem to benefit from this treatment approach (Pfammatter et al., 2006; Wykes et al., 2007). Cognitive remediation approaches may work best when they are added to other existing rehabilita- tion (employment skills) strategies and offered to patients who are already clinically stable (Wykes et al., 2011).  COGNitivE-BEHAviOrAl tHErAPy   As you have already learned, cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) approaches are widely used in the treatment of mood and anxiety disorders as well as many other conditions (Beck, 2005). Until fairly recently, however, researchers did not consider using them for patients with schizophrenia, no doubt because patients with schizophre- nia were considered too impaired. Pioneered by researchers and clinicians in the United Kingdom, cognitive-behavioral approaches have gained momentum in the treatment of schizo- phrenia. The goal of these treatments is to decrease the intensity of positive symptoms, reduce relapse, and decrease social disabil- ity. Working together, therapist and patient explore the subjec- tive nature of the patient’s delusions and hallucinations, examine evidence for and against their veracity or veridicality, and subject delusional beliefs to reality testing. Although the results from the early research studies were encouraging, whether CBT is an effective treatment for schizo- phrenia is now the subject of some debate. Current data suggest that CBT is not very helpful for negative symptoms (Tandon et al., 2010). A recent meta-analysis also suggests that CBT is no better than control interventions (often supportive counselling) in the treatment of schizophrenia (Lynch et al., 2010). Nonethe- less, the possibility that CBT works very well for some subgroups of patients is still a very real possibility.  iNDiviDuAl trEAtmENt   Before 1960 the optimal treatment for patients with schizophrenia was psychoanalytically oriented therapy based on a Freudian type of approach. This is what Nobel Prize–winning mathematician John Nash received when he was a patient at McLean Hospital in Massachusetts in 1958 (the movie   A Beautiful Mind   is based on Nash’s story). By 1980, however, things had changed. Research began to suggest that in some cases, psychodynamic treatments made patients worse (see Mueser & Berenbaum, 1990). This form of individual treatment thus fell out of favor. Individual treatment for schizophrenia now takes a differ- ent form. Hogarty and colleagues (1997a, 1997b) have reported on a controlled 3-year trial of what they call “personal therapy.” Personal therapy is a nonpsychodynamic approach that equips patients with a broad range of coping techniques and skills. The therapy is staged, which means that it comprises different com- ponents that are administered at different points in the patient’s recovery. For example, in the early stages, patients examine the relationship between their symptoms and their stress levels. They also learn relaxation and some cognitive techniques. Later, the focus is on social and vocational skills. Overall, this treatment appears to be very effective in enhancing the social adjustment and social role performance of discharged patients. Educating patients about the illness and its treatment (this approach is called psychoeducation) is also helpful (Xia et al., 2011). Patients who receive psychoeducation in addition to stan- dard treatment are less likely to relapse or be readmitted to the hospital compared to patients who receive standard treatment only. These patients also function better overall and are more satisfied with the treatment they receive. All of this highlights the importance of including patients in their own care and increas- ing their knowledge and understanding about their illness. In summary, although rigorous psychoanalytic approaches may be too demanding and stressful for patients with schizo- phrenia, supportive forms of therapy that offer an opportunity to learn skills and yet are low-key and responsive to patients’ indi- vidual concerns might well be very beneficial. Just as progress in research on schizophrenia requires a partnership between scien- tists across many areas, progress in the treatment of schizophre- nia requires balancing pharmacology with a consideration of the specific needs of the patient. For patients who are at high risk of relapse and who live with their families, family-based interven- tions will be required. If patients have continuing and disturbing hallucinations and delusions, CBT may be appropriate. When patients are clinically stable, social-skills training and rehabilita- tion efforts may be helpful. But in all of this, we must not lose sight of the need of patients (and their families) for support, validation, and respectful care. The treatment of patients with schizophrenia is not easy, and there is no “quick fix.” Although many treatment advances have occurred, we still need more effective, high quality, and clinically sensitive care.  in review  What kinds of clinical outcomes are associated with schizophre- nia? Is full recovery possible or typical? Why do patients with schizophrenia have increased rates of early mortality? In what ways are first- and second-generation (conventional and atypical) neuroleptic medications similar, and in what ways are they different? How effective are these treatments for patients with schizophrenia? Describe the major psychosocial approaches used in treating schizophrenia.
unResOLveD issues  Why are recovery rates in schizophrenia not improving?  A fter the introduction of the first neuroleptic medication (Thorazine) in 1955, there was great optimism that this, and other new “wonder drugs” would revolutionalize the treatment of schizophrenia. Today, many decades later, clinicians have a broad array of first- and second-generation antipsychotic medications at their disposal. But if our treatment options are so much more sophisticated, why are recovery rates in schizophrenia so low? The standard length of a clinical trial that compares a given drug against a placebo is 6 weeks. Numerous clinical studies have demonstrated that antipsychotic medications are effective for the treatment of acute symptoms. So there is little doubt that antipsychotic medications benefit patients in the short term. But what about the longer term? Does staying on antipsychotic medications provide long-term benefits for patients? The answer may be no. Concerns are now being raised that long-term exposure to neuroleptics may set into play biologi- cal process that increase the likelihood that patients will remain chronically ill (Whitaker, 2010). This is particularly worrisome be- cause patients who take neuroleptic medications tend to stay on them for very long periods of time. But how could something that is clinically beneficial in the short term be potentially harmful in the longer term? Standard anti- psychotic medications block D2 receptors in the brain. This is the basis of their therapeutic action. But one result of dopamine blockade is that the density of receptors on the post-synaptic neuron increases, creating a supersensitivity to dopamine. Put more simply, neuroleptics put a brake on dopamine transmis- sion. To compensate for this, the brain responds by pressing the dopamine accelerator (in the form of extra dopamine receptors). Withdrawal of neuroleptics removes the brake and puts the system out of balance because the system is now in an “acceler- ator-on” mode. Moreover, any return of symptoms is taken as evi- dence that the drugs were working and preventing relapse. This impression gets confirmed when the patient goes back on drugs again and the psychosis abates. As one physician noted, “The use of neuroleptics is a trap. ... It is like having a psychosis-inducing agent built into the brain.” (Whitaker, 2010, pp. 107). As you might expect, the idea that antipsychotic medications may help psychosis in the short term but create it in the longer term is highly controversial. However, it may not be as far fetched as it might seem. Data from a 15-year follow-up study show that over time, patients with schizophrenia who are not taking antipsychotic medications fare far better than those who continue to take medi- cations (Harrow, 2007). However, difference in recovery rates be- tween the medicated and unmedicated groups only really start to be apparent after about 4.5 years. It is also the case that patients who stop taking medications tend not to see their psychiatrists. So clinicians don’t see the people who recover. This may be one reason why psychiatry as a whole has been slow to recognize that non-medicated patients might be doing far better than expected. Also relevant here is the observation that patients in less industri- alized countries tend to do better clinically than those in more de- veloped countries. And these are the very patients who are much less likely to be maintained on antipsychotic medications. Perhaps most provocative are the following statistics about chronic mental illness. In 1955 one in every 617 Americans was hospitalized with schizophrenia in a state or county mental hospital. These were chronic long-term patients. Today, the proportion of people with chronic schizophrenia or some other psychotic disorder is much higher—1 in every 125 people. In his efforts to understand why psychiatric medications have not im- proved the long-term clinical outcomes for patients with severe mental illness, Whitaker (who is an investigative reporter) has caused a storm of controversy. Nonetheless, his arguments war- rant serious consideration by all mental health professionals. If the medications that are so helpful in a crisis make things worse when used long term, we need to radically re-think how we man- age the treatment of patients with schizophrenia.  13.1   what are the symptoms of schizophrenia?  •   Schizophrenia is the most severe form of mental illness. It is characterized by impairments in many domains. Characteristic symptoms of schizophrenia include hallucinations, delusions, disorganized speech, disorganized and catatonic behavior, and negative symptoms such as flat affect or social withdrawal.  13.2   what is the prevalence of schizophrenia and when does it begin? who is most affected?  •   Schizophrenia affects just under 1 percent of the population. Most cases begin in late adolescence or early adulthood. The disorder begins earlier in men than in women. Overall, the clinical symptoms of schizophrenia tend to be more severe  13   summary
in men than in women. Women also have a better long-term outcome.  •   Even though schizophrenia first shows itself clinically in early adulthood, researchers believe that it is a neurodevelopmental disorder. Problems with brain development are implicated. Some of the genes implicated in schizophrenia play a role in brain development.  13.3   what are the risk and causal factors associated with schizophrenia?  •   Genetic factors are clearly implicated in schizophrenia. Having a relative with the disorder significantly raises a person’s risk of developing schizophrenia.  •   Other factors that have been implicated in the development of schizophrenia include prenatal exposure to the influenza virus, early nutritional deficiencies, rhesus incompatibility, maternal stress, and perinatal birth complications.  •   Urban living, immigration, and cannabis use during adoles- cence have also been shown to increase the risk of developing schizophrenia.  •   Current thinking about schizophrenia emphasizes the interplay between genetic and environmental factors.  13.4   How is the brain affected in schizophrenia?  •   Patients with schizophrenia have problems in many aspects of their cognitive functioning. They show a variety of atten- tional deficits (e.g., poor P50 suppression and deficits on the Continuous Performance Test). They also show eye-tracking dys- functions.  •   Many brain areas are abnormal in schizophrenia, although abnormalities are not found in all patients. The brain abnormali- ties that have been found include enlarged ventricles (which reflects decreased brain volume), frontal lobe dysfunction, reduced volume of the thalamus, and abnormalities in temporal lobe areas such as the hippocampus and amygdala.  •   Major changes in the brain occur during adolescence. These include synaptic pruning, decreases in the number of excitatory neurons, and increases in the number of inhibitory neurons. There is also an increase in white matter which enhances the connectivity of the brain. Some of these changes may be abnor- mal in people who will later develop schizophrenia.  •   Some of the brain abnormalities that are characteristic of schizo- phrenia get worse over time. This suggests that, in addition to being a neurodevelopmental disorder, schizophrenia is also a neu- roprogressive disorder.  13.5   what neurotransmitters are implicated in schizophrenia?  •   The most important neurotransmitters implicated in schizophre- nia are dopamine and glutamate. Research shows that the dopa- mine (D2) receptors of patients with schizophrenia are supersen- sitive to dopamine.  13.6   why is the family environment important for the well- being of patients with schizophrenia?  •   Patients with schizophrenia are more likely to relapse if their rela- tives are high in expressed emotion (EE). High-EE environments may be stressful to patients and may trigger biological changes that cause dysregulations in the dopamine system. This could lead to a return of symptoms.  13.7   what is the clinical outcome of schizophrenia and how is it treated?  •   For many patients, schizophrenia is a chronic disorder requir- ing long-term treatment or institutionalization. However, when treated with therapy and medications, around 38 percent of patients can show a reasonable recovery. Only about 14 percent of patients recover to the extent that they have minimal symp- toms and function well socially.  •   Patients with schizophrenia are usually treated with first- or second-generation antipsychotic (neuroleptic) medications. Second- generation antipsychotics are about as effective as first-generation anti- psychotics but cause fewer extrapyramidal (motor abnormality) side effects. Antipsychotic drugs work by blocking dopamine receptors.  •   Psychosocial treatments for patients with schizophrenia include cognitive-behavioral therapy, social-skills training, cognitive reme- diation training, and other forms of individual treatment, as well as case management. Family therapy provides families with communi- cation skills and other skills that are helpful in managing the illness. Family therapy also reduces high levels of expressed emotion.  key terms  alogia   450  antipsychotics (neuroleptics)   476  attenuated psychosis syndrome   462  avolition   450  brief psychotic disorder   452  candidate genes   458  catatonic schizophrenia   451  cognitive remediation   478  delusion   446  delusional disorder   452  disorganized schizophrenia   451  disorganized symptoms   450  dopamine   468  endophenotypes   458  expressed emotion (EE)   471  flat affect   450  glutamate   470  hallucination   448  linkage analysis   457  negative symptoms   450  paranoid schizophrenia   451  positive symptoms   450  prodromal   462  psychosis   444  schizoaffective disorder   451  schizophrenia   444  schizophreniform disorder   451
falsely attributes a mood change to psychological causes and fails to consider a neuropsychological origin such as a brain tumor. The brain is an astonishing organ. Weighing around 3 pounds and having the consistency of firm jelly, it is the most complex structure in the known universe (Thompson, 2000). It is also the only organ capable of studying and reading about itself. It is involved in every aspect of our lives from eating and sleeping to falling in love. The brain makes decisions, and it con- tains all the memories that make us who we are. Whether we are physically ill or mentally disturbed, the brain is involved. Because it is so important, the brain is protected in an enclosed space and covered by a thick outer membrane called the dura mater (literally, “hard mother” in Latin). For further protec- tion, the brain is encased by the skull. The skull is so strong that, if it were placed on the ground and weight were applied very slowly, it could support as much as 3 tons (Rolak, 2001, p. 403)! These anatomical facts alone indicate just how precious the brain is. Even though it is highly protected, the brain is vulnerable to damage from many sources. When the brain is damaged, cogni- tive changes result, as you saw in the case study above. Although there may be other signs and symptoms (such as mood or per- sonality changes) as well, changes in cognitive functioning are the most obvious signs of a damaged brain. In this chapter we focus on disorders that arise because of changes in brain structure, function, or chemistry. In some cases, such as with Parkinson’s disease or Alzheimer’s disease, these are caused by internal changes that lead to destruction of brain tis- sue. In others, they result from damage caused by external influ- ences such as trauma from accidents or from the repeated blows to the head that can occur in boxing, soccer, or football. Why are neurocognitive disorders discussed at all in a text- book on abnormal psychology? There are several reasons. First, as their inclusion in the   DSM   indicates, these disorders are regarded as psychopathological conditions. Second, as you just saw in the  case study , some brain disorders cause symptoms that look remark- ably like other abnormal psychology disorders. Third, brain dam- age can cause changes in behavior, mood, and personality. You will recognize this more clearly later when we describe the case of Phineas Gage (who survived a metal bar being blown through his head). Understanding what brain areas are involved when behav- ior, mood, and personality change after brain damage may help  research close-up  Case Study  Case studies are descriptions of one specific case. Case studies can be a useful source of information and can help researchers generate hypotheses. Because of their highly selective nature, however, they cannot be used to draw any scientific conclusions.  14  learning objectives  14.1  What forms of neurocognitive disorders are recognized in  DSM-5 ? What is presumed to be the cause of these disorders?  14.2  What are the clinical features of neurocognitive disorders?  14.3  What is delirium and how is it treated?  14.4  What are the risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease? What changes in the brain are found in patients with Alzheimer’s disease?  14.5  How is Alzheimer’s disease treated?  14.6  What is an amnestic disorder? What causes amnestic disorders?  14.7  What are some of the clinical consequences of head trauma? What factors are related to the degree of impairment that results?  A Simple Case of Mania?   A highly successful busi- nessman, age 45, with no previous history of psychiatric disorder, began to act differently from his usual self. He seemed driven at work. His working hours gradually increased until finally he was sleeping only 2 to 3 hours a night; the rest of the time he worked. He became irritable and began to engage in uncharac- teristic sprees of spending beyond his means. Although he felt extremely productive and claimed he was doing the work of five men, the man’s boss felt otherwise. He was worried about the quality of that work, having observed several recent examples of poor business decisions. Finally, when the man complained of headaches, his boss insisted that he seek help. Source: Adapted from Jamieson & Wells, 1979.  The case you have just read concerns a man who, on first glance, looks as if he might be having an episode of mania. In fact, he is suffering from four tumorous masses in his brain. Clues that this man has a brain disorder rather than a mood disorder include the facts that he is experiencing headaches at the same time as a major change in behavior and that he has no prior history of psychopathology (see Taylor, 2000). Clinicians always need to be alert to the possibility that brain impairment itself may be directly responsible for their patients’ symptoms. Failure to do so could result in serious diagnostic errors, as when a clinician
researchers better understand the biological underpinnings of many problems in abnormal psychology. Fourth, many people who suffer from brain disorders (e.g., people who are diagnosed as having Alzheimer’s disease) react to the news of their diagnosis with depression or anxiety. Prospective studies also suggest that depressive symptoms may herald the onset of disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease by several years and that episodes of depres- sion can double the risk for Alzheimer’s disease even 20 years later (Speck et al., 1995). Finally, neurocognitive disorders of the type we describe in this chapter take a heavy toll on family members, who, for many patients, must shoulder the burden of care. Again, depression and anxiety in relatives of the patients themselves are not uncommon.  Brain Impairment in Adults  The causes of neurocognitive disorders are often much more spe- cific than is the case for many of the disorders we have discussed so far in this book. In   DSM-5 , the disorders that used to be known as “Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders” are now grouped into a new diagnostic category called Neurocognitive Disorders. This term is more straightforward than its predecessor. It is also more conceptually coherent. Disorders in this category are those that involve a loss of cognitive ability that is presumed to be caused by brain damage or disease. Subsections of this diagnostic category include delirium,   major neurocogni- tive disorder   (formerly dementia), and a new category of   mild neurocognitive disorder . The distinction between major and mild neurocognitive disorder is based on severity. As the “Thinking Critically About   DSM-5 ” box illustrates, the inclusion of a mild neurocognitive disorder in   DSM-5   raises some important issues. Within each broad diagnostic category, the specific diagnosis is to be determined by what is thought to be the cause of the prob- lem. For example, the diagnosis of major neurocognitive disorder associated with Alzheimer’s disease is used for patients thought to have Alzheimer’s. For patients whose brain damage is caused by a traumatic brain injury the diagnosis would be major (or mild) neurocognitive disorder associated with traumatic brain injury. In this way the diagnosis provides information about both the cause of the neurocognitive disorder as well as its degree of severity.  Clinical Signs of Brain Damage  With a few exceptions, cell bodies and neural pathways in the brain do not appear to have the power of regeneration, which means that their destruction is permanent. When brain injury occurs in an older child or adult, there is a loss in established functioning. Often, the person who has sustained this loss is painfully aware of what he or she is no longer able to do, adding a pronounced psychological burden to the physical burden of having the lesion. In other cases the impairment may extend to the capacity for realistic self-appraisal (a condition called anosog- nosia), leaving these patients relatively unaware of their losses and hence poorly motivated for rehabilitation. The degree of mental impairment is usually related to the degree of damage to the brain. However, this is not invariably so. Much depends on the nature and location of the damage as well as the premorbid (predisorder) competence and personality of the individual. In some cases involving relatively severe brain  A n important addition to   DSM-5   is the new diagnosis of mild neurocognitive impairment. This change reflects an effort to recognize that cognitive problems that do not reach the level of affecting everyday functioning may still warrant clinical attention. But this new diagnostic category is not without controversy. Some people are concerned that the use of the word “mild” trivializes the cognitive impairments that are being experi- enced. It may also imply that there is no need for services to be provided. On the other hand, refraining from using a term like  dementia   until the cognitive impairment is more severe may al- leviate anxiety and reduce stigma. But if minor cognitive disorder is considered to be a prodromal stage before the onset of more severe impairment, will receiving the more mild diagnosis still not be a source of anxiety? People experiencing minor cognitive impairment (MCI) are thought to be at increased risk for the development of Alzheimer’s disease. If these people can now be formally diagnosed with a disorder (MCI is not a diagnosis but mild neurocognitive impairment is) will we be scaring large numbers of people needlessly? Many people with MCI do not go on to develop more severe cognitive prob- lems. We also have no way to treat Alzheimer’s disease success- fully, yet alone prevent it. So, from a practical perspective, how helpful will this new diagnosis be to those who will receive it? Finally, how do we separate mild neurocognitive disorder from normal aging? This is all the more important because many ex- amples of mild   cognitive problems (e.g., finding that thinking is easier when not distracted by phone, TV, or other conversations or needing occasional reminders to keep track of characters in a movie or a novel) are problems that are hardly unusual for older adults. Every time we lose our keys or forget whether or not we have paid a bill should we now be worried that we have mild neurocognitive impairment?  Thinking criTically about DsM-5  Is the Inclusion of Mild Neurocognitive Disorder a Good Idea?   DSM- 5
The brain can be damaged by exposure to solvents. Nail stu- dios frequently use a variety of organic solvents that are known to be potentially damaging to the central nervous system.  damage, mental change is astonishingly slight. In other cases of seemingly mild and limited damage, there may be quite marked alterations in functioning, as in the following case example.  Hit on the Head With a Rake   A 17-year-old girl was referred by her father for neuropsychiatric evaluation because of the many changes that had been observed in her personality during the past 2 years. She had been an A student and had been involved in many extracurricular activities during her sophomore year in high school. But now, as a senior, she was barely able to maintain a C average, was “hanging around with the bad kids,” and was frequently using marijuana and alcohol. A careful history revealed that 2 years before, her older brother had hit her in the forehead with a rake, which stunned her but did not cause her to lose consciousness. Although she had a headache after the accident, no psychiatric or neurologi- cal follow-up was pursued. Neuropsychological testing at the time of evaluation revealed a significant decline in intellectual functioning from her “preinjury” state. Testing revealed poor concentration, atten- tion, memory, and reasoning abilities. Academically, she was unable to “keep up” with the friends she had had before her injury. She began to socialize with a group of students who had little interest in academics, and she began to see herself as a rebel. When the neuropsychological test results were explained to the patient and her family as a consequence of the brain injury, she and her family were able to understand the “defen- sive” reaction to her changed social behavior. Source: Adapted from Silver et al., 2002.  Diffuse Versus Focal Damage  The disorders discussed in this section are characterized by neu- rocognitive problems, although psychopathological problems (such as psychosis or mood change) may also be associated with them. Some of these disorders are generally well understood, with symptoms that have relatively constant features in people whose brain injuries are comparable in location and extent. For exam- ple, attention is often impaired by mild to moderate   diffuse —or widespread—damage, such as might occur with moderate oxygen deprivation or the ingestion of toxic substances such as mercury. Such a person may complain of memory problems due to an inability to sustain focused retrieval efforts, while his or her abil- ity to store new information remains intact. In an illustration of this, LoSasso, Rapport, and Axelrod (2001, 2002) found that nail salon technicians reported signifi- cantly more cognitive and neurological impairments than con- trols did. The nail salon technicians also performed more poorly than the controls on tests of attention and information process- ing. This is likely due to routine exposure to (meth)acrylates and a variety of organic solvents such as toluene, acetone, and formaldehyde that are known to be potentially damaging to the central nervous system. Such findings highlight the consequences of even low-level exposure to neurotoxic substances that can be found in places where many people work and where many others routinely visit. In contrast to diffuse damage,   focal   brain lesions involve circumscribed areas of abnormal change in brain structure. This is the kind of damage that might occur with a sharply defined traumatic injury or an interruption of blood supply (a stroke) to a specific part of the brain. Figure 14.1 explains how a stroke occurs.  Area deprived of blood BLOCKAGE BLOOD SUPPLY BRAIN  Area filled by blood  BURST ARTERY  1 . An artery in the brain bursts and either floods the surrounding tissue with blood or floods the surface and grooves of the brain.  2 . The blood irritates brain cells, disrupting their functions and causing the brain to swell with fluid.  3 . If the swelling continues, the brain is stopped by the skull and squeezed through the opening in the bottom of the skull, crushing the centers for consciousness and breathing.  HEMORRHAGIC STROKE  1 . A blood clot forms and is swept into the brain where it blocks an artery. Clots usually form in the heart or in arteries of the neck that are damaged by atherosclerotic plaque.  2 . The brain tries to protect itself by raising blood pressure, trying to clear the artery. Meanwhile, the brain cells, deprived of blood, shut down.  3 . If the problem persists, brain cells swell and die.  ISCHEMIC STROKE   figure   14.1  How a Stroke Occurs.   Most strokes oc- cur when an artery in the brain is blocked by a clot. The others, about 13 percent of strokes, occur when a brain artery bursts. Both types can be disastrous.  Source: Dr. Steven Warach, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke; American Heart Association.  Watch   the   Video   Special Topics:   The Plastic Brain   in   MyPsychLab .
Cross sections of damaged brains. The brain on the left shows damage from a stroke. Damage from a bullet is shown on the right.  The location and extent of the damage determine what prob- lems the patient will have. As you are aware, the brain is highly specialized. Although the two hemispheres are closely interrelated, they are involved in somewhat different types of mental processing. At the risk of oversimplifying, it is generally accepted that functions that are dependent on serial processing of familiar information, such as language and solving mathematical equations, take place mostly in the left hemisphere for nearly everyone. Conversely, the right hemi- sphere appears to be generally specialized for grasping overall mean- ings in novel situations; reasoning on a nonverbal, intuitive level; and appreciating of spatial relations. Even within hemispheres, the vari- ous lobes and regions mediate specialized functions (see Figure 14.2).  Motor strip  Regulation of voluntary movement  Corpus callosum  Communication between the brain's right and left hemispheres  Limbic system  Attention, emotions, “fight or flight,” memory  Frontal lobe  Learning, abstracting, reasoning, inhibiting  Hypothalamus  Regulation of metabolism, temperature, emotions  Temporal lobe  Discrimination of sounds, verbal and speech behavior  Reticular formation  Arousal reactions, information screening  Medulla  Breathing, blood pressure, other vital functions  Cerebellum  Fine motor coordination, posture, and balance  Occipital lobe  Visual discrimination and some aspects of visual memory  Thalamus  Major relay station for messages from all parts of the body, important in sensations of pain  Parietal lobe  Somaesthetic and motor discriminations and functions  Sensory strip  Integration of sensory information from various parts of the body  figure   14.2  Brain Structures and Associated Behaviors  Watch   the   Video   The Basics: How The Brain Works Part 2   in   MyPsychLab
table   14.1  Impairments Associated With Brain Disorders  The following types of difficulties are often the consequences of brain disease, disorder, or damage. 1.   Impairment of memory.   The individual has trouble remembering recent events, although memory for past events may remain more intact. Some patients with memory problems may confabulate—that is, invent memories to fill in gaps. In severe instances, no new experience can be re- tained for more than a few minutes. 2.   Impairment of orientation.   The individual may not know where he or she is, what the day is, or who familiar people are. 3.   Impairment of learning, comprehension, and judgment.   The individual’s thinking becomes clouded, sluggish, or inaccurate. The person may lose the ability to plan with foresight or to understand abstract concepts and hence to process complex information (described as “thought impoverishment”). 4.   Impairment of emotional control or modulation.   The individual is emotionally overreactive: laughing, crying, or flying into a rage with little provocation. 5.   Apathy or emotional blunting.   The individual is emotionally underreactive and seems indifferent to people or events. 6.   Impairment in the initiation of behavior.   The individual lacks self-starting capability and may have to be reminded repeatedly about what to do next, even when the behavior involved remains well within the person’s range of competence. This is sometimes referred to as “loss of executive function.” 7.   Impairment of controls over matters of propriety and ethical conduct.   The individual may manifest a marked lowering of personal standards in areas such as appearance, personal hygiene, sexuality, or language. 8.   Impairment of receptive and expressive communication.   The individual may be unable to comprehend written or spoken language or may be unable to express his or her own thoughts orally or in writing. 9.   Impaired visuospatial ability.   The individual has difficulty coordinating motor activity with the characteristics of the visual environment, a deficit that affects graphomotor (handwriting and drawing) and constructional (e.g., assembling things) performance.  Although none of these relationships between brain location and behavior can be considered universally true, it is possible to make broad generalizations about the likely effects of dam- age to particular parts of the brain. Damage to the frontal areas, for example, is associated with one of two contrasting clinical pictures: (1) being unmotivated and passive and with limited thoughts and ideas or (2) featuring impulsiveness and distract- ibility. Damage to specific areas of the right parietal lobe may produce impairment of visual-motor coordination, and damage to the left parietal area may impair certain aspects of language function, including reading and writing, as well as arithmetical abilities. Damage to certain structures within the temporal lobes disrupts an early stage of memory storage. Extensive bilateral temporal damage can produce a syndrome in which remote memory remains relatively intact but nothing new can be stored for later retrieval. Damage to other structures within the tempo- ral lobes is associated with disturbances of eating, sexuality, and emotion. Occipital damage produces a variety of visual impair- ments and visual association deficits, the nature of the deficit depending on the particular site of the lesion. For example, a person may be unable to recognize familiar faces. Unfortunately, many types of brain disease are general and therefore diffuse in their destructive effects, causing multiple and widespread inter- ruptions of the brain’s circuitry. Some consequences of brain disorders are described in Table 14.1 above.  The Neurocognitive/Psychopathology Interaction  Most people who have a neurocognitive disorder do not develop psychopathological symptoms such as panic attacks, dissociative episodes, or delusions. However, many show at least mild deficits in cognitive processing and self-regulation. Similarly, some peo- ple who suffer from psychopathological disorders also have cog- nitive deficits. For example, patients with bipolar disorder have persistent cognitive deficits that can be detected even during periods of illness remission (Bora et al., 2011). This highlights the close link between psychopathological and neuropsychologi- cal conditions. The psychopathological symptoms that do sometimes accompany brain impairment are not always predictable and can reflect individual nuances consistent with the patient’s age (see Tateno et al., 2002), her or his prior personality, and the total psychological situation confronting the patient. We should also never just assume that a psychological disorder—for example, a serious depression that follows a brain injury—is always attrib- utable to the patient’s brain damage. Certainly that could be the case. However, it is also possible that the depression might be better explained by the patient’s awareness of dramatically lessened competence and the loss of previous skills. After a trau- matic brain injury caused by an accident or a fall, for example, around 18 percent of patients make a suicide attempt (Simp- son & Tate, 2002). People with more favorable life situations tend to fare better after brain injury than people whose lives are more disorganized or disadvantaged (Yeates et al., 1997). Intelligent, well-educated, mentally active people have enhanced resistance to mental and behavioral deterioration following significant brain injury (e.g., see Mori et al., 1997a; Schmand et al., 1997). Because the brain is the organ responsible for the integration of behavior, however, there are limits to the amount of brain damage that anyone can tolerate or compensate for without exhibiting abnormal behavior.
in review  •   Describe some of the major ways in which the brain can become damaged. •   What kinds of clinical symptoms are often associated with dam -  age to the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes of the brain? •   List nine impairments that are typical of focal and diffuse brain damage.  Delirium  Delirium   is a state of acute brain failure that lies between normal wakefulness and stupor or coma (see Figure 14.3). The word comes from the Latin   delirare , meaning to be out of one’s furrow or track.  Clinical Picture  A commonly occurring syndrome, delirium is characterized by confusion, disturbed concentration, and cognitive dysfunc- tion (see the   DSM-5   table on page 489 for diagnostic crite- ria). Although the   DSM-IV-TR   criteria stated that delirium involved a disturbance in consciousness, this word was removed in   DSM-5 . This is because the essence of delirium is better captured by the idea of a disturbance in awareness. Think of delirium as a condition with a sudden onset that involves a fluctuating state of reduced awareness. Delirium is treated as a distinct disorder in   DSM-5   (rather than as a type of major or mild neurocognitive disorder) because it can quickly fluctuate in severity. It can also coexist with a major or mild neurocogni- tive disorder (such as Alzheimer’s disease). It therefore does not fit well with being categorized as a major or mild form of neu- rocognitive disorder. In addition to a disturbance in level of awareness, delirium also involves impairments of memory and attention as well as disorganized thinking. Hallucinations and delusions are quite common (see Trzepacz et al., 2002). In addition, the syndrome often includes abnormal psychomotor activity such as wild thrashing about and disturbance of the sleep cycle. A deliri- ous person is essentially unable to carry out purposeful mental activity of any kind. The intensity of the symptoms also fluctu- ates over the course of a 24-hour period, as described in the fol- lowing case study.  Delirium Following a Routine Operation   Mrs. Patterson was 75 years old when she was admitted to the hospital. A widow who lived alone, she had broken her leg, and she needed a routine operation. The operation was successful. However, shortly after -  ward, Mrs. Patterson began to show signs of confusion. She had problems with awareness and attention, and she had no idea of what had happened to her or why she was in the hospital. During the day, she seemed agitated and aimlessly wandered around. She was unable to focus enough to watch television or to read. She was also unable to recognize friends and relatives who came to visit her. On several occasions, nursing staff saw her staring at an imagi -  nary spot on the ceiling of her room and having conversations with imaginary people. Mrs. Patterson refused to take any medica -  tions. She would knock her meals onto the floor when they were brought to her. Between these outbursts, Mrs. Patterson was able to calm down, sleeping for short periods of about 30 minutes at a time. However, at night, she could hardly sleep at all. Instead, she wandered around the hospital ward. She went into the rooms of other patients, waking them up, and sometimes even trying to get into their beds. On a number of occasions, she was found in her nightdress, trying to leave the hospital. However, the staff always stopped her and carefully escorted her back to her room. Source: Based on Üstün et al., 1996.  Delirium can occur in a person of any age. However, the elderly are at particularly high risk, perhaps because of brain changes caused by normal aging that lead to reduced “brain reserve.” As described in the case of Mrs. Petersen, delirium is very common in the elderly after they have had surgery, with patients over 80 being particularly at risk (Trzepacz et al., 2002). At the other end of the age spectrum, children are also at high risk of delirium, perhaps because their brains are not yet fully developed. In addition to advanced age, other risk fac- tors for delirium include dementia, depression, and tobacco use (Fricchione et al., 2008).  figure   14.3  Continuum of Level of Awareness.  Source: Adapted with permission from the   American Psychiatric Publishing Textbook of Neuropsychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences , Fifth Edition (Copyright © 2008). American Psychiatric Publishing.  Alert awake Delirium  Stupor Coma
Estimates of the prevalence of delirium vary widely with the age of the population studied. However, somewhere between 10 and 51 percent of patients who have had surgery will experi- ence delirium; patients who have had cardiac surgery seem to be at especially high risk. The presence of delirium is also a bad prognostic sign. Delirium is correlated with cognitive decline, longer hospital stays, more health problems, and increased mor- tality; 25 percent of elderly patients with delirium die within the following 6 months (Fricchione et al., 2008; Witlox et al., 2010). Delirium may result from several conditions including head injury and infection. However, the most common cause of delirium is drug intoxication or withdrawal. Toxicity from medi- cations also causes many cases of delirium. This may explain why delirium is so common in the elderly after they have had surgery.  Treatments and Outcomes  Delirium is a true medical emergency, and its underlying cause must be identified and managed. Most cases of delirium are reversible, except when the delirium is caused by a terminal ill- ness or by severe brain trauma. Treatment involves medication, environmental manipulations, and family support. The medi- cations that are used for most cases are neuroleptics (Fricchione et al., 2008; Lee et al., 2004). These are the same drugs that are used to treat schizophrenia. For delirium caused by alcohol or drug withdrawal, benzodiazepines (such as those used in the treatment of anxiety disorders) are used (Trzepacz et al., 2002). In addition, environmental manipulations that help patients stay oriented, such as good lighting, clear signage, and easily visible calendars and clocks, can be helpful. It is also important that staff members introduce themselves when they work with patients, explain what their role is, and provide reorienting prompts whenever necessary. Some patients, however, especially elderly ones, may still have orientation problems, sleep prob- lems, and other difficulties even months after an episode of delirium.  in review  •   What clinical features characterize the syndrome of delirium?  •   Describe some common causes of delirium. Who is most at risk of developing this clinical condition?  •   How is delirium treated?  Major Neurocognitive Disorder (Dementia)  In   DSM-5   the broad diagnostic category of   dementia   has been renamed. The term major neurocognitive disorder is now used. One reason for this is to reduce stigma. It is also the case that, although the term dementia is widely accepted for older adults it is not a very appropriate term for younger adults who have cognitive problems (e.g., those who have sustained damage from head injuries). Major neurocognitive disorders are those that involve marked deficits in cognitive abilities. These may be appar- ent in such areas as attention, executive ability, learning and memory, language, perception, and social cognition (skills required for understanding, interpreting, and responding to the behavior of others). What is crucial is that there is a decline from a previously attained level of functioning (see the  DSM-5   table for diagnostic criteria for major neurocognitive disorder). In older people the onset of cognitive deficits is typically quite gradual. Early on, the individual is alert and fairly well attuned to events in the environment. Even in the early stages, however, memory is affected, especially memory for recent events. As time goes on, patients show increasingly marked deficits in abstract thinking, the acquisition of new knowledge or skills, visuospatial comprehension, motor control, problem solving, and judgment. These are often accompanied by impairments in emotional con- trol and in moral and ethical sensibilities; for example, the person  A.   A disturbance in attention (i.e., reduced ability to direct, focus, sustain, and shift attention) and awareness (reduced orienta- tion to the environment).  B.   The disturbance develops over a short period of time (usually hours to a few days), represents a change from baseline atten- tion and awareness, and tends to fluctuate in severity during the course of a day.  C.   An additional disturbance in cognition (e.g., memory deficit, disorientation, language, visuospatial ability, or perception).  D.   The disturbances in Criteria A and C are not better explained by another preexisting, established, or evolving neurocognitive disorder and do not occur in the context of a severely reduced level of arousal, such as coma.  E.   There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition, substance intoxica- tion or withdrawal (i.e., due to a drug of abuse or to a medica- tion), or exposure to a toxin, or is due to multiple etiologies.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Delirium   DSM- 5
A.   Evidence of significant cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one or more cognitive domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and memory, language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition) based on:  1.   Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician that there has been a significant decline in cognitive function; and  2.   substantial impairment in cognitive performance, prefer- ably documented by standardized neuropsychological testing or, in its absence, another quantified clinical assessment.  B.   The cognitive deficits interfere with independence in everyday activities (i.e., at a minimum, requiring assistance with complex instrumental activities of daily living such as paying bills or managing medications).  C.   The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a delirium.  D.   The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another men- tal disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, schizophrenia).  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,   Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  criteria for  Major Neurocognitive Disorder (Dementia)   DSM- 5  may engage in crude solicitations for sex. Deficits may be progressive (getting worse over time) or static, but is more often the former. Occasionally a major neurocognitive disorder is reversible if it has an underlying cause that can be removed or treated (such as vitamin defi- ciency). Some treatable causes of major neuro- cognitive disorder are listed in Table 14.2.   Watch   the   Video  Alvin: Dementia (Alzheimer’s Type)   on   MyPsychLab .  At least 50 different disorders are known to cause the types of cognitive deficits that are now included in the cat- egory of major neurocognitive disorders (Bondi & Lange, 2001). They include degenerative diseases such as Hunting- ton’s disease and Parkinson’s disease (which are described below). Other causes are strokes (see Ivan et al., 2004); certain infectious diseases such as syphilis, meningitis, and AIDS; intracranial tumors and abscesses; certain dietary deficiencies (especially of the B vitamins); severe or repeated head injury; anoxia (oxygen deprivation); and the ingestion or inhalation of toxic substances such as lead or mercury. As Figure 14.4 on page 491 illustrates, the most common cause of major neurocognitive disorder is degenerative brain dis- ease, particularly Alzheimer’s disease. In this chapter we will focus primarily on this greatly feared disorder. We will also briefly discuss neurocognitive disorders that result from HIV infection and stroke (vascular dementia).  Parkinson’s Disease  Named after James Parkinson, who first described it in 1817,  Parkinson’s disease   is the second most common neurodegen- erative disorder (after Alzheimer’s disease). It is more often found in men than in women, and it affects between 0.5 and 1 percent of people between ages 65 and 69 and 1 to 3 percent of people over 80 (Toulouse & Sullivan, 2008). However, the actor Michael J. Fox developed Parkinson’s disease when he was only 30 years old. His book   Lucky Man   (2002) offers a moving per- sonal account of his struggle with the illness and well describes some of its major symptoms. Parkinson’s disease is characterized by motor symptoms such as resting tremors or rigid movements. The underlying cause of this is loss of dopamine neurons in an area of the brain called the substantia nigra. Dopamine is a neurotransmitter that is involved in the control of movement. When dopamine neurons are lost, a person is unable to move in a controlled and fluid manner. In addition to motor symptoms, Parkinson’s disease can involve psychological symptoms such as depression, anxiety, apathy, cognitive problems, and even hallucinations and delusions (Chaudhuri et al., 2011). Later on in the illness, cognitive deficits may also become apparent Over time, 25 to 40 percent of patients with Parkinson’s disease will show signs of cognitive impairment (Marsh & Margolis, 2009). The causes of Parkinson’s disease are not clear, although both genetic and environmental factors are suspected. Genetic factors may be more important in cases where the Parkinson’s disease develops  table   14.2  Some Treatable Causes of Major Neurocognitive Disorder  Medications   Certain tumors or infections of the brain Clinical depression   Blood clots pressing on the brain Vitamin B 12   deficiency   Metabolic imbalances (including thyroid, kidney, or liver disorders) Chronic alcoholism
earlier in life, and environmental factors may be more relevant in later onset cases (Wirdefeldt et al., 2011). Interestingly, smoking and drinking coffee may provide some protection against the development of Parkinson’s disease, although the reasons for this remain unclear (Toulouse & Sullivan, 2008; Wirdefeldt et al., 2011). The symptoms of Parkinson’s disease can be temporarily reduced by medications, such as Mirapex (pramipexole), that increase the availability of dopamine in the brain. However, once the medications wear off, the symptoms return. Another treat- ment approach that is now being tried is deep brain stimulation (described in  6). In the future, stem cell research may also offer some hope for patients with this disease.  Huntington’s Disease  Huntington’s disease   is a rare degenerative disorder of the cen- tral nervous system that afflicts about 1 in every 10,000 people (Phillips et al., 2008). It was first described in 1872 by the American neurologist George Huntington. The illness begins in midlife (the mean age of onset is around 40 years), and it affects men and women in equal numbers. Huntington’s disease is characterized by a chronic, progressive chorea (involuntary and irregular movements that flow randomly from one area of the body to another). However, subtle cognitive problems often predate the onset of motor symptoms by many years. These cog- nitive problems are no doubt due to the progressive loss of brain tissue (detectable with brain imaging) that occurs as much as a decade before the formal onset of the illness (Shoulson & Young, 2011). Patients eventually develop dementia, and death usually occurs within 10 to 20 years of first developing the illness. There are currently no effective treatments that can restore functioning or slow down the course of this terrible and relentless disorder. American folk singer Woody Guthrie, whose song “This Land Is Your Land” is well known, died of the disease in 1967 when he was 55 years of age. Huntington’s disease is caused by a single dominant gene (the Huntingtin gene) on chromosome 4. This genetic mutation was discovered as a result of intense research on people living in villages around Lake Maracaibo in Venezuela, where this disease is extremely common (Marsh & Margolis, 2009). Because the Huntingtin gene is a dominant gene, anyone who has a par- ent with the disease has a 50 percent chance of developing the disease himself or herself. A genetic test can be given to at-risk individuals to determine whether they will eventually develop the disorder. However, in the United States, only about 10 per- cent of people who are eligible for testing choose to know what their genetic destiny is (Shoulson & Young, 2011). If you were in this situation, what would you do? One interesting finding here is that the majority of people who have asked to be tested are women (Hayden, 2000).  Alzheimer’s Disease  Alzheimer’s disease   is a progressive and fatal neurodegenerative disorder. It takes its name from Alois Alzheimer (1864–1915), the German neuropathologist who first described it in 1907. It is the most common cause of dementia (Jalbert et al., 2008). In the  DSM-5   it is called “major (or mild) neurocognitive disorder associ- ated with Alzheimer’s disease.” Alzheimer’s disease is associated with a characteristic dementia syndrome (see the case study below) that has an imperceptible onset and a usually slow but progressively deteriorating course, terminating in delirium and death.  The Forgetful Mail Carrier   At the age of 60, Harold took early retirement from his government job because, for the previous 5 years, he had been having difficulty performing his work properly. A mail carrier, he was constantly making errors and delivering mail to the wrong places. He also began to become more withdrawn, gradually giving up hobbies that had been important to him. At first, his increasing forgetfulness was  figure   14.4  Causes of Dementia (major neurocognitive disorder). Causes are presented according to the percentage of all cases they account for.  Stroke   Parkinson’s disease Other causes  5.5% 4.4% 7.7% 12.2% 14.5% 55.6%  Percentage  0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 Alzheimer’s disease Multiple causes Brain injury
not very noticeable when he was at home. Then, one day when he was 62, Harold was hiking in an area he knew well and was unable to find his way home. Since that time, his memory prob- lems have grown increasingly worse. He loses things, forgets appointments, and can no longer find his way around his home- town. Now, at the age of 66, Harold no longer recognizes his close friends and is uninterested in reading or watching televi- sion. Things are so bad that his wife is afraid to leave him alone in the house because he is so forgetful. Source: Based on Üstün et al., 1996.  CLINICAL PICTurE   The diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease is made after a thorough clinical assessment of the patient. How- ever, the diagnosis can only be confirmed after the patient’s death. This is because an autopsy must be performed to see the brain abnormalities that are such distinctive signs of this disease. In the living patient, the diagnosis is normally given only after all other potential causes of dementia are ruled out by medical and family history, physical examination, and laboratory tests. Alzheimer’s disease usually begins after about age 45 (Mala- spina et al., 2002). Contrary to what many people believe, it is characterized by multiple cognitive deficits, not just problems with memory. There is a gradual declining course that involves slow mental deterioration. Figure 14.5 shows the performance of two men on a battery of cognitive tests repeated over a period of several years. Both men were of similar age and level of education, and both were initially free of Alzheimer’s disease. However, for the man who subsequently developed Alzheimer’s disease (confirmed on autopsy), a progressive, downward course in his cognitive performance is apparent (see Storandt, 2008). In its earliest stages, Alzheimer’s disease involves minor cog- nitive impairment. For example, the person may have difficulty recalling recent events, make more errors at work, or take longer to complete routine tasks. In the later stages, there is evidence of dementia; deficits become more severe, cover multiple domains, and result in an inability to function. For example, the person may be easily disoriented, have poor judgment, and neglect his or her personal hygiene. Because they have impaired memory for recent events, many patients have “empty” speech in which grammar and syntax remain intact but vague and seemingly pointless expressions replace meaningful conversational exchange (e.g., “It’s a nice day, but it might rain”). The case study below, which involves a man who had retired some 7 years prior to his hospitalization, is typical.  Restless and Wandering   During the past 5 years, the patient had shown a progressive loss of interest in his surround- ings and during the last year had become increasingly “childish.” His wife and eldest son had brought him to the hospital because they felt they could no longer care for him in their home, particu- larly because of the grandchildren. They stated that he had become careless in his eating and other personal habits and was restless and prone to wandering about at night. He could not seem to remember anything that had happened during the day but was garrulous concerning events of his childhood and middle years. After admission to the hospital, the patient seemed to dete- riorate rapidly. He could rarely remember what had happened a few minutes before, although his memory for remote events of his childhood remained good. When visited by his wife and children, he mistook them for old friends, and he could not recall anything about the visit a few minutes after they had departed. The following brief conversation with the patient, which took place after he had been in the hospital for 9 months (and about 3 months before his death), shows his disorientation for time and person.  doctor : How are you today, Mr. _______?  patient : Oh . . . hello [looks at doctor in rather puzzled way as if trying to make out who he is].  doctor : Do you know where you are now?  patient : Why yes . . . I am at home. I must paint the house this summer. It has needed painting for a long time but it seems like I just keep putting it off.  doctor : Can you tell me the day today?  patient : Isn’t today Sunday . . . why, yes, the children are coming over for dinner today. We always have dinner for the whole family on Sunday. My wife was here just a minute ago but I guess she has gone back into the kitchen.  The temporal lobes of the brain are the first regions to be damaged in the person with Alzheimer’s disease. Because the hippocampus is located here, memory impairment is an  figure   14.5  Test Performance in a Healthy Man and a Man Who Developed Alzheimer’s Disease.  Source: Figure 1 on page 198 from Martha Storandt. (2008). Cognitive deficits in the early stages of Alzheimer’s disease.   Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17 (3), 198–2202 (Copyright © 2008). Association for Psychological Science. Reproduced with permission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  76 –3 –2 –1 0 1 2 78   80   82  Age (years) Composite (z)  84   86   88  AD Normal
Cognitive difficulties are not an inevitable consequence of aging. Betty White hosted   Saturday Night Live   when she was 89 years old.  table   14.3  Summary of risk Factors for Alzheimer’s Disease  Advanced age Female Current smoker Fewer years of education Lower income Lower occupational status Head trauma  early symptom of the disease. Loss of brain tissue in the tem- poral lobes may also explain why delusions are found in some patients (Lyketsos et al., 2000). Although delusions of persecu- tion are predominant, delusional jealousy is sometimes seen. Here, the person persistently accuses his or her partner or spouse—who is often of advanced age and physically debili- tated—of being sexually unfaithful. Family members may be accused of poisoning the patient’s food or of plotting to steal the patient’s funds. One study of physically aggressive patients with Alzheimer’s disease found that 80 percent of them were delusional (Gilley et al., 1997). With appropriate treatment, which may include medication and the maintenance of a calm, reassuring, and unprovocative social environment, many people with Alzheimer’s disease show some alleviation of symptoms. In general, however, deterioration continues its downward course over a period of months or years. Eventually, patients become oblivious to their surroundings, bed- ridden, and reduced to a vegetative state. Resistance to disease is lowered, and death usually results from pneumonia or some other respiratory or cardiac problem. The median time to death is 5.7 years from the time of first clinical contact (Jalbert et al., 2008).  PrEVALENCE   Alzheimer’s disease is becoming a major pub- lic health problem, straining societal and family resources. It accounts for most cases of dementia (Lyketsos et al., 2000). Although this disease is not an inevitable consequence of aging (Betty White hosted   Saturday Night Live   when she was 89), age is a major risk factor. It has been estimated that the rate of Alzheimer’s disease doubles about every 5 years after a person reaches the age of 40 (Hendrie, 1998). Whereas fewer than 1 percent of 60- to 64-year-olds have the disease, up to 40 percent those aged 85 and older do (Jalbert et al., 2008). In the United states, more than 5 million people are living with this disease. Worldwide, the figure is over 35 million (Selkoe, 2012). By 2030 it is expected that this number will rise to a staggering 66 million (Vreugdenhil et al., 2012). The future prospects are therefore somewhat alarming. If we have not solved the problem of pre- venting Alzheimer’s disease (or arresting it in its early stages) by around that time, society will be faced with the overwhelming problem of caring for millions of demented senior citizens. For reasons that are not yet clear, women seem to have a slightly higher risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease than men (Jalbert et al., 2008). Indeed, Alois Alzheimer’s original case was a 51-year-old woman. Women tend to live longer than men, but this may not entirely explain the increased prevalence of women with Alzheimer’s disease. However, a relevant factor may be loneliness. In one study of 800 elderly people (the majority of whom were female), those who reported that they felt lonely had twice the risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease over the course of the 4-year follow-up. This association was independent of their scores on a measure of cognition, suggesting that loneliness is not an early sign of cognitive impairment or a consequence of impaired cognitive skill (Wilson, Krueger et al., 2007). It is reasonable to suggest that women are more likely to experience loneliness because they live longer and so outlive their husbands. This may be important when trying to understand sex differ- ences in the risk for Alzheimer’s disease. In addition to advanced age and being female, other risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease include being a current smoker, having fewer years of formal education, having lower income, and having a lower occupational status (Jalbert et al., 2008). Table 14.3 provides a summary of the most well-researched risk factors to date. The prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease is higher in North America and Western Europe and lower in such places as
table   14.4  Genes Associated With Alzheimer’s Disease Gene   Chromosome   Type  Amyloid precursor protein gene (APP) 21   mutation Presenilin 1 (PS1)   14   mutation Presenilin 2 (PS2)   1   mutation Apolipoprotein E (APOE)   19   susceptibility gene  Africa, India, and South East Asia (Ballard et al., 2011; Ferri et al., 2005). Such observations have led researchers to suspect that lifestyle factors such as a high-fat, high-cholesterol diet are implicated in the development of Alzheimer’s disease (Sjogren & Blennow, 2005). Also implicating diet, researchers have found that high levels of an amino acid called homocys- teine (which is a risk factor for heart disease) seem to increase a person’s risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease later in life (Ravaglia et al., 2005). Levels of homocysteine in the blood can be reduced by taking folic acid and certain B vitamins. Taking statin drugs to lower cholesterol also seems to offer some protection against Alzheimer’s disease (Sparks et al., 2005).  CAuSAL FACTOrS   When we picture a typical Alzheimer’s patient, we imagine a person of very advanced age. Sometimes, however, the disease begins much earlier and affects people in their 40s or 50s. In such cases, cognitive decline is often rapid. Considerable evidence suggests a substantial genetic contribution in early-onset Alzheimer’s disease, although different genes may be involved in different families (see Gatz, 2007). Genes also play a role in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Cases of   early-onset Alzheimer’s disease   appear to be caused by rare genetic mutations. So far, three such mutations have been identified (Ballard et al., 2011). One involves the   APP  (amyloid precursor protein) gene, which is located on chromo- some 21. Mutations of the   APP   gene are associated with an onset of Alzheimer’s disease somewhere between 55 and 60 years of age (Cruts et al., 1998). The fact that a mutation of a gene on chromosome 21 has been found to be important is interesting because it has long been known that people with Down syndrome (which is caused by a tripling, or trisomy, of chromosome 21) who sur- vive beyond about age 40 develop an Alzheimer’s-like dementia (Bauer & Shea, 1986; Janicki & Dalton, 1993). They also show similar neuropathological changes (Schapiro & Rapoport, 1987). In addition, cases of Down syndrome tend to occur more frequently in the families of patients with Alzheimer’s disease (Heyman et al., 1984; Schupf et al., 1994). One study has found that mothers who gave birth to a child with Down syndrome before age 35 had a 4.8 times greater risk of devel- oping Alzheimer’s disease when they were older compared to mothers of children with other types of mental retardation (Schupf et al., 2001). Other cases of even earlier onset appear to be associated with mutations of a gene on chromosome 14 called   presenilin 1   (PS1) and with a mutation of the   presenilin 2   (PS2) gene on chromosome 1. These genes are associated with an onset of Alzheimer’s disease somewhere between 30 and 50 years of age (Cruts et al., 1998). One carrier of the PS1 mutation is even known to have developed the disorder at age 24 (Wis- niewski et al., 1998). Remember, however, that these mutant genes, which are autosomal dominant genes and so nearly always cause disease in anyone who carries them, are extremely rare. The APP, PS1, and PS2 genetic mutations probably account, together, for no more than about 5 percent of cases of Alzheimer’s disease. A gene that plays an important role in cases of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease is the   APOE   (apolipoprotein) gene on chro- mosome 19. This gene codes for a blood protein that helps carry cholesterol through the bloodstream. We know that differing forms (genetic alleles) of   APOE   differentially predict risk for  late-onset Alzheimer’s disease . Three such alleles have been identified, and everyone inherits two of them, one from each parent. One of these alleles, the   APOE-E4 allele , significantly enhances risk for late-onset disease. Thus a person may inherit zero, one, or two of the APOE-E4 alleles, and his or her risk for Alzheimer’s disease increases correspondingly. For example, having two APOE-E4 alleles results in a sevenfold increase in a person’s chances of developing the disease (Ballard et al., 2011). Another such allele, APOE-E2, seems to convey protection against late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. The remaining and most common allele form, APOE-E3, is of neutral significance. The alleles differ in how efficient they are in clearing amyloid, with APOE-E2 being most efficient and APOE-E4 least efficient (Karran et al., 2011). APOE-E4 has been shown to be a significant predictor of memory deterioration in older individuals with or without clini- cal dementia (Hofer et al., 2002). The APOE-E4 allele is rela- tively uncommon in Chinese people compared to its frequency in people from Europe or North America. In contrast, people of African descent are especially likely to have this allele (Waters & Nicoll, 2005). Table 14.4 summarizes the genes that have been implicated in Alzheimer’s disease. The APOE-E4 allele (which can be detected by a blood test) is overrepresented in all types of Alzheimer’s disease including the early-onset and late-onset forms. Approximately 65 percent of patients have at least one copy of the APOE-E4 allele (see Malaspina et al., 2002). Exciting as they are, however, these dis- coveries still do not account for all cases of Alzheimer’s disease, not even all late-onset cases (e.g., Bergem et al., 1997). Many people who inherit the most risky APOE pattern (two APOE-E4 alleles) do not succumb to the disorder. One study found that only 55 percent of people who had two APOE-E4 alleles had
developments in research  Depression Increases the Risk of Alzheimer’s Disease  H aving a history of depression seems to put a person at higher risk for the later development of Alzheimer’s dis- ease (Ownby et al., 2006). Although we are not yet sure why this is, researchers speculate that some of the changes in the brain that are known to be associated with depression and with stress may somehow leave the brain more vulnerable to problems down the road (Wilson et al., 2008). Depression may also be an early warning sign of the onset of dementia. In a large, community-based prospective study of people aged 65 and older, researchers found that people who had no early (before age 50) history of depression but who developed symptoms of depression later in life were about 46 percent more likely to develop dementia over the course of the (approximately 7-year) follow-up period (Li et al., 2011). What this means is that late-life depression may be more than a risk factor for depression. Rather, it could be an early manifesta- tion of the dementia itself. This raises the interesting question of whether treating depression might delay the clinical onset of dementia. People with a genetic risk for Alzheimer’s disease because they carry the APOE-E4 gene may be especially vulnerable to devel- oping Alzheimer’s disease if they also have a history of depres- sion. In one study, depressed men who had the APOE-E4 gene were more than seven times more likely to develop Alzheimer’s disease over the course of a 6-year follow-up compared to men who had neither the gene nor a history of depression. For men who did not have the gene but did have a history of depression, the risk of later Alzheimer’s disease was also higher (1.6-fold increase), but not nearly as high as the risk for the men who had the gene   and   the history of depression (Irie et al., 2008). Hav- ing the APOE-E4 allele does not make a person more likely to develop depression; however, when the gene and depression occur together, the risk of later Alzheimer’s disease is especially high.  developed Alzheimer’s disease by age 80 (Myers et al., 1996). And others with Alzheimer’s disease have no such APOE-E4 risk factor. In addition, substantial numbers of monozygotic twins are discordant for the disease (Bergem et al., 1997; Breitner et al., 1993). Why should this be? Current thinking is that our genetic susceptibility interacts with other genetic factors and with envi- ronmental factors to determine whether we will succumb to any particular disorder. Clearly, other genes involved in the develop- ment of Alzheimer’s disease still remain to be found. However, environmental factors may also play a key role. As we have noted, the differences in the prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease across different parts of the world suggest that diet may be an important mediating environmental variable. Being overweight, having Type 2 diabetes, or not being physically active have also been implicated as risk factors. The association with diabetes is interesting because researchers have found that insulin levels are abnormally low in some of the brain areas that are most affected by Alzheimer’s disease. Other environmental factors under con- sideration include exposure to metals such as aluminum and experiencing head trauma. One prospective study has found that traumatic brain injury is associated, for up to 5 years after the injury, with a fourfold increase in risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease (see Malaspina et al., 2002). And, as illustrated in Devel- opments in Research box above, depression also elevates risk of later Alzheimer’s disease). On the other hand, exposure to non- steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen may be pro- tective and lead to a lower risk of Alzheimer’s disease (Breitner et al., 1994; in’t Veld et al., 2001; Weggen et al., 2001). People with more cognitive reserve (a concept combining education, occupation, and mental engagement) also seem to be at reduced risk (Ballard et al., 2011). Recent research with mice further sug- gests that exposure to a more stimulating and novel environment slows down the development of Alzheimer-related changes in the brain (Li et al., 2013). In other words, it may be possible to reduce or delay the occurrence of Alzheimer’s disease by deliber- ately limiting exposure to risks, living a more interesting life, and taking other preventive measures.  NEurOPATHOLOGy   When Alois Alzheimer performed the first autopsy on his patient (she was known as Auguste D.), he identified a number of brain abnormalities that are now known to be characteristic of the disease. These are (1) amyloid plaques, (2) neurofibrillary tangles, and (3) atrophy (shrinkage) of the brain. Although plaques and tangles are also found in normal brains, they are present in much greater numbers in patients with Alzheimer’s disease, particularly in the temporal lobes. Current thinking is that, in Alzheimer’s disease, neurons in the brain secrete a sticky protein substance called   beta amyloid  much faster than it can be broken down and cleared away. This beta amyloid then accumulates into   amyloid plaques   (see Figure 14.6, p. 496). These are thought to interfere with synaptic func- tioning and to set off a cascade of events that leads to the death of brain cells. Beta amyloid has been shown to be neurotoxic (meaning it causes cell death). Amyloid plaques also trigger local chronic inflammation in the brain and release cytokines (see Chapter 5) that may further exacerbate this process. Having the APOE-E4 form of the   APOE   gene is associated with the more rapid buildup of amyloid in the brain (Jalbert et al., 2008). Animal studies also suggest that stress makes the
Alzheimer’s disease may be those that can target and prevent amyloid buildup. Another notable alteration in Alzheimer’s disease concerns the neurotransmitter   acetylcholine   (ACh). This neurotransmitter is known to be important in the mediation of memory. Although there is widespread destruction of neurons in Alzheimer’s disease, particularly in the area of the hippocampus (Adler, 1994; Mori  figure   14.6  Brain Damage in Alzheimer’s Disease.   Watch   the   Video   Alzheimer’s and Dementia   in   MyPsychLab  neurocognitive consequences of amyloid accumulation much worse (Alberini, 2009; Srivareerat et al., 2009). Insulin may also play a role in regulating amyloid. Although some scientists believe that the accumulation of beta amyloid plays a primary role in the development of Alzheimer’s disease, others suspect that it may be a defensive response rather than a causal factor. Importantly, amyloid deposits can be present as many as 10 years before clinical signs of Alzheimer’s disease first show them- selves (Shim & Morris, 2011). It is not yet known if symptoms become apparent when the amyloid burden in the brain crosses a certain threshold or if amyloid buildup itself triggers other destructive processes that eventually culminate in symptoms (Karran et al., 2011).  Neurofibrillary tangles   are webs of abnormal filaments within a nerve cell. These filaments are made up of another protein called   tau . In a normal, healthy brain, tau acts like a scaffolding, supporting a tube inside neurons and allowing them to conduct nerve impulses. In Alzheimer’s disease the tau is mis- shaped and tangled. This causes the neuron tube to collapse. Although abnormal tau aggregation can occur indepen- dently, there is reason to believe that buildup of tau protein is accelerated by an increasing burden of amyloid in the brain (Shim & Morris, 2011). Animal studies of mice that have been genetically modified to be highly susceptible to develop- ing Alzheimer’s disease (so-called transgenic mice) support this idea (Götz et al., 2001; Lewis et al., 2001). If correct, it suggests that the most promising drug treatments for   This photomicrograph of a brain tissue specimen from an Alzheimer’s patient shows the characteristic plaques (dark patches) and neurofibrillary tangles (irregular pattern of strand-like fibers).
et al., 1997b), evidence suggests that among the earliest and most severely affected structures are a cluster of cell bodies located in the basal forebrain and involved in the release of ACh (Schli- ebs & Arendt, 2006). The reduction in brain ACh activity in patients with Alzheimer’s disease is correlated with the extent of neuronal damage (i.e., plaques, tangles) that they have sustained. The loss of cells that produce ACh makes a bad situation much worse. Because ACh is so important in memory, its deple- tion contributes greatly to the cognitive and behavioral deficits that are characteristic of Alzheimer’s disease. For this reason, drugs (called cholinesterase inhibitors) that inhibit the break- down of ACh (and so increase the availability of this neurotrans- mitter) can be clinically beneficial for patients (Winblad et al., 2001).  TrEATMENT AND OuTCOME   Despite extensive research ef- forts, we still have no treatment for Alzheimer’s disease that will restore functions once they have been destroyed or lost. Current treatments, targeting both patients and family members, aim to diminish agitation and aggression in patients and reduce distress in caregivers as much as possible (Practice Guideline, 2007). Some common problematic behaviors associated with dementia are wandering off, incontinence, inappropriate sexual behavior, and inadequate self-care skills. These can be some- what controlled via behavioral approaches (see  6). Behavioral treatments need not be dependent on complex cog- nitive and communication abilities (which tend to be lacking in patients with dementia). Because of this, they may be partic- ularly well suited for therapeutic intervention with Alzheimer’s disease. In general, reports of results are moderately encourag- ing in terms of reducing unnecessary frustration and embarrass- ment for the patient and difficulty for the caregiver (Fisher & Carstensen, 1990; Mintzer et al., 1997; Teri et al., 1997). As we noted earlier, some patients with Alzheimer’s disease develop psychotic symptoms and are very agitated. Antipsychotic medications (like those used in the treatment of schizophrenia) are sometimes given to alleviate these symptoms. However, these medications must be used with great caution. The Food and Drug Administration has issued a warning that patients with dementia who receive atypical antipsychotic medications are at increased risk of death (Schultz, 2008). Moreover, although anti- psychotic medications may alleviate some symptoms to a very modest degree, there is no good evidence that they are better than placebo when it comes to patients’ overall daily functioning and cognition (Sultzer et al., 2008). Treatment efforts to improve cognitive functioning have focused on the consistent findings of acetylcholine depletion in Alzheimer’s disease. The reasoning here is that it might be pos- sible to improve functioning by administering drugs that enhance the availability of brain ACh. Currently, the most effective way of doing so is by inhibiting the production of acetylcholinesterase, the principal enzyme involved in the metabolic breakdown of acetylcholine. This is the rationale for administering drugs such as tacrine (Cognex) and donepezil (Aricept). Winblad and col- leagues (2001) studied 286 patients who were randomly assigned to receive either medication (donepezil) or placebo for a 1-year period. Patients’ cognitive functioning and ability to perform daily activities were measured at the start of the study and again at regu- lar intervals over the study period. Patients who received the medi- cation did better overall than patients who received the placebo. However, all patients declined in their functioning over the course of the study. Furthermore, although donepezil does help patients a little, these gains do not mean that patients taking the drug are any less likely to avoid institutionalization than those who are not tak- ing the medication (AD2000 Collaborative Group, 2004). The newest medication that has been approved to treat Alzheimer’s disease is memantine, which is marketed as Namenda. Unlike other approved medications, memantine is not a cholinesterase inhibitor. Instead, it appears to regulate the activity of the neurotransmitter glutamate, perhaps by protect- ing cells against excess glutamate by partially blocking NMDA receptors. Memantine, which can be used alone or in combina- tion with donepezil, appears to provide patients with some cog- nitive benefits (Forchetti, 2005; Reisberg et al., 2003). However, when it comes to day-to-day functioning, the improvements that come from taking medications are still very small (Ballard et al., 2011; Hansen et al., 2007). Yet another line of treatment research is focused on develop- ing vaccines that might help clear away any accumulated amyloid plaques. Although initial findings from animal research looked promising (e.g., McLaurin et al., 2002), human clinical trials of a vaccine were terminated prematurely because of dangerous side effects. Nonetheless, researchers continue to explore novel treat- ment approaches (Gestwicki et al., 2004; Hardy, 2004; Hutter- Paier et al., 2004). To date, however, all efforts to develop new drugs to treat Alzheimer’s disease have been unsuccessful. No new medications have become available since Namenda was approved in 2003. This is very disappointing for patients and for their families, who live in hope of major breakthroughs. Unfortunately, once most types of neuronal cells have died they are permanently lost. This means that even if some new treatment could halt a patient’s progressive loss of brain tissue, he or she would still be left seriously impaired. This makes the research effort to detect Alzheimer’s disease in its earliest stages all the more important.  EArLy DETECTION   Most researchers believe that signs of Alzheimer’s disease might be detectable long before clinical symptoms appear. To explore this, they are using a range of brain-imaging techniques to study the brains of people at high risk for developing the disease. People at high risk include those who have the APOE-E4 allele as well as people who are expe- riencing minor cognitive impairment (MCI). MCI is thought to be on a continuum between healthy aging and the earliest signs of dementia (Risacher & Saykin, 2013). Some people with MCI report problems with memory. However, other
the WorlD around us  Exercising Your Way to a Healthier Brain?  I f you want to preserve your brain function as you age, you may be surprised to learn that one of the best things you can do is to exercise regularly. A growing amount of research suggests that exercise has considerable neurocognitive benefits. For example, in one prospective study of 299 elderly people (average age 78 years), those who walked 6 to 9 miles per week had much less loss of gray matter over time than did those who were more sedentary (Erikson et al., 2010). In another year- long study, people aged 55 to 80 years who had no dementia were randomly assigned to a program of 40-minute walks three times a week or a program of stretching and toning that lasted the same amount of time. At the end of 1 year, those who had exercised by walking showed a 2 percent increase in the size of their hippocampus. In contrast, those in the stretching and ton- ing control group showed a decline in their hippocampal volume (which is expected with normal aging). In other words, exercise seemed to reverse the age-related loss whereas stretching and toning did not. What is also interesting is that increases in the volume of the hippocampus were also directly related to im- provements in memory (Erikson et al., 2011). Not surprisingly, researchers are now actively studying the ef- fects of exercise in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Recent findings suggest that even a short program of exercise for 4 months conducted at home under the supervision of a carer or other family member can improve cognitive and physical func- tioning in elderly patients with Alzheimer’s disease (Vreugdenhil et al., 2012). Inexpensive and easy to implement, exercise pro- grams are now providing some much needed hope for patients and families coping with dementia.  (non-memory-related) cognitive problems are also predictive of later Alzheimer’s disease (Storandt, 2008). Brain scans of people with MCI show that, like patients with Alzheimer’s disease, they have atrophy in a number of brain areas, including the hippocampus (which you may recall is involved in memory) (Chételat et al., 2003; Kubota et al., 2005; Devanand et al., 2007). Moreover, reduction in the size of the hippocampus predicts the later development of Alzheimer’s dis- ease both in people with MCI and in elderly people who do not report any memory or cognitive impairments (De Leon et al., 2004; den Heijer et al., 2006). This suggests that atrophy of this brain area is an early sign of the disease. Functional imaging techniques also show that the hip- pocampus is less active when patients with Alzheimer’s disease  Atrophy of the hippocampus, a brain area critical for memory, is an early sign of Alzheimer’ disease. In these pictures, arrows highlight the body of the hippocampus. Note the atrophy in the image on the right.
Why must therapeutic interventions also consider the caregivers of Alzheimer’s patients?  (compared to controls) are engaged in memory tasks (Kato et al., 2001; Sperling et al., 2003). Again, this is also true of people with MCI (Chételat et al., 2003; De Santi et al., 2001). These findings are in contrast to those found in people who are cog- nitively normal but who are at high risk because they carry the APOE-E4 allele. These people do not show a lack of activation in the hippocampus when they are involved in memory tasks. Instead, brain-imaging studies reveal the opposite. Rather than underactivity, people who are at genetic high risk show increased activity in various parts of the brain, including the hippocampus, when they engage in memory tasks (Bookheimer et al., 2000; Smith, Andersen et al., 2002). How can we explain these rather contradictory findings? Current thinking is that the greater degree of brain activation in people who are cognitively normal but at high risk for devel- oping Alzheimer’s disease reflects the greater effort they need to make to manage cognitive tasks. Simply put, carriers of the APOE-E4 allele may have to work harder. Because their brain tissue is still healthy (unlike in people with Alzheimer’s disease or MCI), we see an   increase   in brain activation in response to a cognitive challenge rather than the decrease in activation that is more typical of Alzheimer’s disease patients or those with MCI. A similar pattern of increased brain activation in certain key areas is also found in people with MCI who are able to perform better on cognitive tests compared to those who perform worse (Clément & Belleville, 2010). Does brain-imaging research allow us to identify people who are going to develop dementia? Not yet. None of the changes found to date are specific enough to be used to make an early diagnosis. This, however, is the goal for the future. In the mean- time, if you want to preserve your brain, you might consider reading The World Around Us box on page 498. And if you think this information is just for older people, keep in mind that the brain starts to decrease in size after about age 18. By the time we reach the age of 80, our brain has lost about 15 percent of its original weight (Perl, 1999).  SuPPOrTING CArEGIVErS   In the past few decades there has been a sharp increase in the number of dementia special care units in nursing homes. The vast majority of patients with dementia will be institutionalized before they die. Until patients reach the stage of being severely impaired, however, most live in the community, cared for by their family members. Very often, the burden of care falls on a single person. Any comprehensive approach to therapeutic intervention must consider the stresses experienced by caregivers. Some of the heartbreaking losses that they encounter are depicted in such movies as   Iris   and   Away from Her . In 2008 former Supreme Court justice Sandra Day O’Connor disclosed that her husband, who suffered from Alzheimer’s disease, had found new happiness by developing a romantic relationship with a fellow Alzheimer’s sufferer in the facility in which he lived. Although this story garnered a great deal of media attention, it is far from a rare occurrence. Not all families are able to cope with this difficult situation with the love and grace that characterized Sandra Day O’Connor and her family. Not surprisingly, as a group, caregivers are at high risk for becoming socially isolated and for developing depression (Richards & Sweet, 2009). One study showed that in those caregivers who were not clinically depressed, cortisol levels were essentially similar to those in patients with major depression (Da Roza et al., 2001). Caregivers of patients with Alzheimer’s disease tend to consume high quantities of psychotropic medica- tion themselves and to report many stress symptoms and poor health (Cummings, 2004; Hinrichsen & Niederehe, 1994). Providing caregivers with counseling and supportive therapy is very beneficial and produces measurable reductions in their levels of depression (Mittelman et al., 2004).  Neurocognitive Disorder Associated with HIV-1 Infection  Infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) wreaks havoc on the immune system. Over time, this infection can lead to acquired immune deficiency syndrome, or AIDS. Worldwide, the HIV type 1 virus has infected more than 36 million people and resulted in approximately 20 million deaths (Kaul et al., 2005). In addition to devastating the body, the HIV virus is also capable of inducing neurological disease that can result in neuro- cognitive problems. This can happen in two ways. First, because the immune system is weakened, people with HIV are more sus- ceptible to rare infections caused by parasites and fungi. How- ever, the virus also appears capable of damaging the brain more
directly, resulting in neuronal injury and destruction of brain cells (see Kaul et al., 2005; Snider et al., 1983). The neuropathology of   HIV-associated neurocognitive impairment   involves various changes in the brain, among them generalized atrophy, edema (swelling), inflammation, and patches of demyelination (Adams & Ferraro, 1997; Sewell et al., 1994). No brain area may be entirely spared, but the damage appears to be concentrated in subcortical regions, notably the central white matter, the tissue surrounding the ventricles, and deeper gray matter structures such as the basal ganglia and thalamus. Ninety percent of patients with AIDS show evidence of such changes on autopsy (Adams & Ferraro, 1997). The neuropsychological features of AIDS tend to appear as a late phase of HIV infection, although they often appear before the full development of AIDS itself. They begin with mild mem- ory difficulties, psychomotor slowing, and diminished attention and concentration (see Fernandez et al., 2002, for a review). Pro- gression is typically rapid after this point, with clear-cut demen- tia appearing in many cases within 1 year, although considerably longer periods have been reported. The later phases also include behavioral regression, confusion, psychotic thinking, apathy, and marked withdrawal. Estimates from the early 1990s suggested HIV-related dementia was present in 20 to 30 percent of people with advanced HIV disease. Fortunately, the arrival of highly active antiretroviral therapy has not only resulted in infected people living longer but has also reduced the prevalence of HIV-related dementia to around 10.5 percent (Kaul et al., 2005). However, although rates of frank dementia have decreased, around 30 percent of people who are infected with the HIV virus show some signs of MCI (Treisman et al., 2009). Moreover, for reasons that are not yet clear, women may be at especially high risk of HIV-related cognitive impairment. Treatment with antiretroviral therapy does not fully prevent the HIV virus from damaging the brain (Kaul et al., 2005). This may be because HIV penetrates into the nervous system soon after a person becomes infected. What this means is that even though the new therapies have made HIV/AIDS a chronic but manageable condition (at least for those who have access to the necessary medications), prevention of infection remains the only certain strategy for avoiding the cognitive impairments associ- ated with this disease.  Neurocognitive Disorder Associated with Vascular Disease  Neurocognitive disorder associated with vascular disease ( vascu- lar dementia ) is frequently confused with Alzheimer’s disease because of its similar clinical picture of progressive dementia and its increasing incidence and prevalence rates with advancing age. However, it is an entirely different disease in terms of its underly- ing neuropathology. In this disorder, a series of circumscribed cerebral infarcts—interruptions of the blood supply to minute areas of the brain because of arterial disease, commonly known as “small strokes”—cumulatively destroy neurons over expand- ing brain regions. The affected regions become soft and may degenerate over time, leaving only cavities. Although vascular cognitive impairment tends to have a more varied early clinical picture than Alzheimer’s disease (Wallin & Blennow, 1993), the progressive loss of cells leads to brain atrophy and behavioral impairments that ultimately mimic those of Alzheimer’s disease (Bowler et al., 1997). Vascular cognitive impairment tends to occur after the age of 50 and affects more men than women (Askin-Edgar et al., 2002). Abnormalities of gait (e.g., being unsteady on one’s feet) may be an early predictor of this condition (Verghese et al., 2002). Vascular cognitive impairment is less common than Alzheim- er’s disease, accounting for only 19 percent of dementia cases in a community sample aged 65 years or older (Lyketsos et al., 2000). One reason for this is that these patients have a much shorter course of illness because they are vulnerable to sudden death from stroke or cardiovascular disease (Askin-Edgar et al., 2002). Accompanying mood disorders are also more common in vascular dementia than in Alzheimer’s disease, perhaps because subcortical areas of the brain are more affected (Lyketsos et al., 2000). The medical treatment of vascular dementia, though com- plicated, offers slightly more hope than that of Alzheimer’s dis- ease. Unlike Alzheimer’s disease, the basic problem of cerebral arteriosclerosis (decreased elasticity of brain arteries) can be medically managed to some extent, perhaps decreasing the likeli- hood of further strokes. The daunting problems that caregivers face, however, are much the same in the two conditions, indicat- ing the appropriateness of support groups, stress reduction tech- niques, and the like.  in review  •   What is delirium? How is delirium different from major neurocog- nitive disorders?  •   List five diseases or clinical disorders that can cause major neuro- cognitive impairments.  •   What genes are implicated in Alzheimer’s disease?  •   Describe some of the major environmental risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease.  •   What kinds of neuropathological abnormalities are typical of the Alzheimer’s brain?  Amnestic Disorder  “Amnestic” is just another way of saying “amnesia,” and the characteristic feature of   amnestic disorder   is strikingly disturbed memory. Immediate recall (i.e., the ability to repeat what has
just been heard) is not usually affected. Memory for remote past events is also usually relatively preserved. However, short-term memory is typically so impaired that the person is unable to recall events that took place only a few minutes previously. To com- pensate, patients sometimes confabulate, making up events to fill in the void that they have in their memories. In contrast to patients with other forms of neurocognitive disorders, overall cognitive functioning in an amnestic disorder patient is often quite good. The affected person may be able to execute a complex task if it provides its own distinctive cues for each stage of the sequence. Brain damage is the root cause of amnestic disorder. This damage might be caused by strokes, injury, tumors, or infec- tions (Andreescu & Aizenstein, 2009). However, not all brain damage is permanent.   Korsakoff’s syndrome   is an amnestic disorder that is caused by deficiency in vitamin B1 (thiamine). Because of this, the memory problems associated with Korsa- koff’s syndrome can sometimes be reversed if it is detected early enough and vitamin B1 is given. Korsakoff’s syndrome is often found in chronic alcoholics or in other people who do not eat healthily. It was the cause of the memory loss of the patient in the next case study.  He Forgot the Name of His Daughter   A power- fully built six-footer, Charles Jackson still showed traces of a mili- tary bearing. Before he left the army a year before, he had been demoted to buck private; this was the culmination of a string of disciplinary actions for drunkenness. For over a year he had had monthly consultations with the current interviewer. On this occasion, the interviewer asked when they had last met. Charles replied, “Well, I just don’t know. What do you think?” To the follow-up question, he said he guessed he had seen the interviewer before. “Maybe it was last week.” Asking him to remain seated, the interviewer went into the waiting room to ask Mrs. Jackson how she thought her husband was doing. She said, “Oh, he’s about the same as before. He sketches some. But mostly he just sits around the house and watches TV. I come home and ask him what he’s watching, but he can’t even tell me.” At any rate, Charles was no longer drinking, not since they had moved to the country. It was at least 2 miles to the nearest convenience store, and he didn’t walk very well any- more. “But he still talks about drinking. Sometimes he seems to think he’s still in the army. He orders me to go buy him a quart of gin.” Charles remembered quite a few things, if they happened long enough ago—the gin, for example, and getting drunk with his father when he was a boy. But he couldn’t remember the name of his daughter, who was two and a half. Most of the time, he just called her “the girl.” The interviewer walked back into the inner office. Charles looked up and smiled. “Have I seen you before?” asked the interviewer. “Well, I’m pretty sure.” “When was it?” “It might have been last week.” Source: Adapted from Morrison, 1995, pp. 50–51.  In   DSM-IV   amnestic disorder was a specific and distinct diagnosis. In   DSM-5 , patients who would have been given this diagnosis will now be diagnosed as having a major neurocogni- tive disorder. The cause of the disorder will also be listed (e.g., major neurocognitive disorder due to substance use). Unlike other forms of neurocognitive disorder, however, the substan- tial decline in functioning occurs in a single cognitive domain (memory). Another common cause is head trauma. Stroke, sur- gery in the temporal lobe area of the brain, hypoxia (oxygen deprivation), and some forms of brain infections (such as encephalitis) can also lead to amnestic disorder. In these cases, depending on the nature and extent of damage to the affected neural structures and on the treatment undertaken, the disorder may remit with time. A wide range of techniques have been developed to assist the good-prognosis amnestic patient in remembering recent events (e.g., Gouvier et al., 1997). Moreover, because procedural memory (i.e., the abil- ity to learn routines, skills, and actions) is often preserved in patients with amnesia, even patients without memory for specific personal experiences can still be taught to perform tasks that might help them reenter the workforce (Cavaco et al., 2004).  in review  •   What are the most striking clinical features of amnestic disorder?  •   What are some of the major causes of amnestic disorder?  •   How is amnestic disorder diagnosed in DSM-5?  Disorders Involving Head Injury  Traumatic brain injury (TBI)   occurs frequently, affecting just under 2 million people each year in the United States. The most com- mon cause of TBI are falls, followed by motor vehicle accidents. Other causes include assaults and sports injuries (although the vast majority of these are probably never even reported). Children aged 0 to 4, adolescents aged 15 to 19, and adults aged 65 years and older are most likely to experience a TBI. In every age group rates of TBI are higher for males than they are for females (Faul et al., 2010). In   DSM-5   diagnostic terms such as major (or mild) neuro- cognitive disorder associated with head trauma are used to refer to the cognitive compromises that result from head injury.
We are also now experiencing an escalation of cases of TBI caused by explosive blasts (Champion et al., 2009). Blasts seem to damage the brain in ways that are different from the brain damage seen in civilian cases of TBI. So many veterans have been injured by improvised explosive devices that TBI has been referred to as the signature injury of the Iraq War. Research suggests that around 15 percent of soldiers who have served in Iraq have experienced a TBI (Hoge et al., 2008). The military is now making efforts to improve screen- ing and to increase rehabilitation service for veterans (see Munsey, 2007). However, for many, a full recovery may never be possible.  Clinical Picture  Clinicians categorize brain injuries as resulting from either a closed-head injury (where the cranium remains intact) or a penetrating head injury (where some object such as a bullet enters the brain). In closed-head injury, the damage to the brain is indirect—caused by inertial forces that cause the brain to come into violent contact with the interior skull wall or by rotational forces that twist the brain mass relative to the brain stem. Not uncommonly, closed-head injury also causes diffuse neuron damage because of the inertial force. In other words, the rapid movement of the rigid cranium is stopped on contact with an unyielding object. However, the softer brain tissue within keeps moving, and this has a shearing effect on nerve fibers and their synaptic interconnections. Severe head injuries usually cause unconsciousness and disruption of circulatory, metabolic, and neurotransmitter regu- lation. Normally, if a head injury is severe enough to result in unconsciousness, the person experiences   retrograde amnesia , or inability to recall events immediately  preceding   the injury. Apparently, the trauma inter- feres with the brain’s capacity to consolidate into long-term storage the events that were still being processed at the time of the trauma.   Anterograde amnesia   (also called posttraumatic amnesia) is the inability to store effectively in memory events that happen during variable periods of time   after  the trauma. It is also frequently observed and is regarded by many as a negative prognostic sign. A person rendered unconscious by a head injury usually passes through stages of stupor and confu- sion on the way to recovering clear consciousness. This recovery of consciousness may be complete in the course of minutes, or it may take hours or days. Following a severe injury and loss of conscious- ness, a person’s pulse, temperature, blood pressure, and important aspects of brain metabolism are all affected, and survival may be uncertain. In rare cases, an individual may live for extended periods of time without regaining consciousness, a condition known as  coma . The duration of the coma is generally related to the sever- ity of the injury. If the patient survives, coma may be followed by delirium, marked by acute excitement and disorientation and hallucinations. Gradually the confusion may clear up and the individual may regain contact with reality. Individual courses of recovery are highly variable and difficult to predict (Waters & Nicoll, 2005). Large numbers of relatively minor closed-head brain concus- sions and contusions (bruises) occur every year as a result of car accidents, athletic injuries, falls, and other mishaps. Even riding roller coasters that generate high G-forces may cause brain injury  Former Arizona Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords is recovering from a traumatic brain injury sustained after an assailant shot her in the head. She is receiving extensive therapy and is making considerable progress.  Exposure to high G-forces, such as those experienced on some theme park rides, can cause neurological injury in some individuals by creating small tears in delicate blood vessels in the brain.
table   14.5  Signs of a Concussion  Temporary loss of consciousness Confusion or foggy feeling in the brain Amnesia for the period surrounding the event/injury Headache that gets worse and doesn’t go away Nausea or vomiting Excessive drowsiness Slurred or incoherent speech Difficulty remembering new information Dizziness These symptoms may not be immediately apparent. Some symptoms may develop several days after the injury.  in some people (see Fukutake et al., 2000). It is estimated that two deaths per year can be attributed to brain hemorrhages that result from roller coaster rides (Pelletier & Gilchrist, 2005). Although these statistics are unlikely to dissuade you from heading to a theme park the next time you want to have some fun, they have prompted some calls for greater oversight of the industry. People who play certain sports are at high risk of experienc- ing concussions and brain injuries. For males, the greatest risk comes from playing football; for females, the greatest risk comes from playing soccer (Lincoln et al., 2011). Signs of concussion are listed in Table 14.5. However, the majority of concussions do not involve a loss of consciousness. It is important to know that, after a concussion, the brain is four or five times more vul- nerable to a second impact and that this increased vulnerability lasts for several weeks. As described in The World Around Us box on page 504, and as illustrated in the following case study, athletes at every level sometimes want to get back into the game without adequate recovery time, often with devastating consequences. In an effort to deal with this problem, many States now require that young people who have sustained a sports-related brain injury must see a doctor before they can be allowed to play again. Return to play protocols are also being established (Sahler & Greenwald, 2012).  Zack’s Story   Zack, a gifted ath- lete who played both offense and defense on his junior high school football team, was injured at 13 when his head struck the ground after tackling an opponent. The official called a time out, and Zack was sidelined for just three plays before half- time. Despite the blow, Zack shook it off and by the start of the third quarter he was back in the game. “He always wanted to be part of the play” his father recalls. After a hard-played second half, Zack collapsed on the field. He was airlifted to a medical facility where he underwent emer- gency life-saving surgery to remove the left and right side of his skull to relieve pressure from his injured and swelling brain. He experienced numerous strokes, spent 7 days on a ventilator, and was in a coma for 3 months before he awoke to a new reality. It was 9 months before Zack spoke his first word, 13 months before he could move a leg or an arm, and he spent 20 months on a feeding tube. Confined to a wheelchair, it was nearly 3 years until Zack was able to stand, with assistance, on his own two feet. In 2009 the state of Washington passed a new law named after Zack. It requires that any young athlete who shows signs of a concussion be examined and cleared for play by a licensed health care provider. The law protects young athletes from the kind of life-threatening and potentially life-long consequences that can be caused by shaking off an injury and returning to play. Source: Adapted from CDC, 2010.  We are also learning something about the factors that may increase a person’s susceptibility to having problems after a brain injury. One important risk factor appears to be the presence of the APOE-E4 allele that we discussed earlier (Waters & Nicoll, 2005). In one study of boxers, the presence of the APOE-E4 genetic risk factor was associated with more chronic neurological deficits (Jor- dan et al., 1997). A study of patients being treated in a neurosurgi- cal unit found that APOE-E4 predicted patients doing more poorly at a 6-month follow-up. This was true even after controlling for such factors as severity of the initial injury (Teasdale et al., 1997). Perhaps the most famous historical example of TBI is the case of Phineas Gage (Harlow, 1868). Gage, 25 years old, was  Though Phineas Gage survived when a tamping iron entered his face and shot through his head, his personality was altered such that his friends found that he was “no longer Gage.”
the WorlD around us  Brain Damage in Professional Athletes  F or athletes, collisions are often part of the game. But new evidence is forcing many in collegiate and professional sports to consider the potential for long-term brain dam- age that may come from heading the ball or tackling another player. This issue came to the attention of sports fans when Ted Johnson, a former Super Bowl champion and linebacker for the New England Patriots, went public about the crippling depres- sions and headaches he now experiences (MacMullan, 2007). Johnson, who has been diagnosed with a chronic postconcus- sion syndrome (involving fatigue, irritability, memory loss, and depression), is also showing signs of early brain damage. He believes that his problems are a direct result of the multiple hits to the head he sustained during his playing career. Repeat concussions are very serious. After a blow to the head, the brain remains in a vulnerable state for several weeks. A sec- ond injury during this time will cause an exponential amount of damage. Johnson’s cognitive functioning declined dramatically after he was involved in a serious collision during an exhibition game and had to be pulled off the field. Four days later, he was expected to engage in full contact during practice. Although he knew this was a bad idea, his pride, combined with the pressure not to appear weak, kept him from asking to be excused from the physical drills. During the practice he took a minor hit and experienced the warm and hazy sensation that signals a concus- sion. For Johnson, it was the beginning of the end. Johnson decided to go public with his story after the suicide of former NFL defensive back Andre Waters. Waters, who was known to be a tough and hard-hitting player, suffered many re- peat concussions during the course of his career. After his death at age 44, a neurologist examined his brain and reported that the tissue resembled that of an 85-year-old; Waters also had some signs of Alzheimer’s disease. Repeat concussions were suspected to be the cause of his brain damage. Research supports this speculation. A study of 2,552 retired pro- fessional football players showed that the majority (61 percent) had experienced at least one concussion during their playing careers. Moreover, those players who had a history of three or more concussions were five times more likely to be diagnosed with cognitive problems and had three times more memory impairment than players with no concussion history (Guskiewicz et al., 2005). Players who had had repeat concussions were also more likely to later be diagnosed with depression (Guskiewicz et al., 2005). The risks associated with concussions are now being taken very seriously in the NFL and also in the NHL. Several hockey players have had their careers cut short by concussions. In 2011, Sidney Crosby, captain of the Pittsburgh Penguins waited 10 months to return to the ice after experiencing two concussions only to be sidelined again shortly afterwards. He is now playing again. After taking a hit, staying out of future games until the brain has had enough time to heal is of critical importance.  Sidney Crosby, captain of the Pittsburgh Penguins hockey team, experienced concussion-like symptoms for more than a year after being injured. He wisely took time to recover before returning to the ice.  the foreman of a gang of men who were building a railroad in Cavendish, Vermont. On September 13, 1848, there was an accident, and an iron rod (3 feet 7 inches in length, about an inch in diameter, and weighing just over 13 pounds) was blown through Gage’s skull, entering through his lower cheek. Gage was thrown back by the force of the explosion but started to speak a few minutes later. His men put him in an ox cart and took him to his hotel, whereupon he walked, with a little assistance, to his room, bleeding profusely. Miraculously, Gage survived the acci- dent and eventually made a full physical recovery. However, in other respects he was a different man. What was most striking was the change in his personality. As his doctor noted, “He is fitful, irreverent, indulging at times in the grossest profanity (which was not previously his custom), manifesting but little deference for his fellows, impatient of restraint or advice when it conflicts with his desires, at times pertinaciously obstinate, yet capricious and vacillating, devising many plans of future operations, which are no sooner arranged than they are abandoned in turn for others” (Harlow, 1868, p. 327). As others have noted, changes such as this (emotional dyscontrol, personality alterations, and impair- ment of self-awareness) are fairly characteristic of severe damage to the frontal lobes (Stuss et al., 1992).
of drive and spontaneity, agitation, anxiety, depression, and paranoid suspiciousness. Like cognitive changes, the kinds of personality changes that emerge in severely damaged people depend, in large measure, on the site and extent of their injury (Prigatano, 1992). However, even though more than half the people who sustain TBI develop psychological symptoms, and even though alleviation of such symptoms can improve rehabili- tation outcome, there are currently few studies of risk factors, pathogenesis, and treatment of these disturbances (Rao & Lyketsos, 2002). Children who undergo significant TBI are more likely to be adversely affected the younger they are at the time of injury and the less language, fine-motor, and other competencies they have. This is because brain damage makes it harder to learn new skills and because young children have fewer developed skills to begin with. The severity of their injury and the degree to which their environment is accommodating also affect children’s recov- ery (Anderson et al., 1997; Taylor & Alden, 1997; Yeates et al., 1997). When the injury is minor, most children emerge without lasting negative effects (Satz et al., 1997). Treatment of TBI beyond the purely medical phase is often long, difficult, and expensive. It requires careful and continuing assessment of neuropsychological functioning and the design of interventions intended to overcome the deficits that remain. Many different treatment approaches are used including medica- tion, rehabilitative interventions (such as occupational, physical, and speech/language therapy, cognitive therapy, behavior ther- apy, social skills training, vocational and recreational therapy) as well as individual, group, and family therapy (Hampton, 2011). Often, a treatment goal is to provide patients with new techniques to compensate for losses that may be permanent (Bennett et al., 1997). Research is also showing that patients with TBI may sometimes benefit from treatment with donepezil, an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor widely used in the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease (Zhang et al., 2004). Table 14.6 shows some  Treatments and Outcomes  As illustrated in the case of Zack, prompt medical treatment of a brain injury may be necessary to save the person’s life and remove the pressure on the brain caused by intense swelling. Immediate medical treatment may also have to be supplemented by a long- range program of reeducation and rehabilitation involving many different professionals. Although many TBI patients show few residual effects from their injury, particularly if they have experienced only a brief loss of consciousness, other patients sustain definite and long- lasting impairment. Common symptoms of minor TBI include headaches, memory problems, sensitivity to light and sound, diz- ziness, anxiety, irritability, fatigue, and impaired concentration (Miller, 2011). When the brain damage is extensive, a patient’s general intellectual level may be considerably reduced, especially if there is damage to the temporal lobe or parietal lobes. Most people have significant delays in returning to their occupations, and many are unable to return at all (Dikmen et al., 1994). Other losses of adult social role functioning are also common (Hallett et al., 1994). Some 24 percent of TBI cases, overall, develop posttraumatic epilepsy, presumably because of the growth of scar tissue in the brain. Seizures usually develop within 2 years of the head injury. For decades after a head injury, there is also an elevated risk of depression as well as other disorders such as substance abuse, anxiety disorders, and personality disor- ders (Holsinger et al., 2002; Koponen et al., 2002). In a minority of brain injury cases, dramatic personality changes occur such as those described in the case of Phineas Gage. Other kinds of personality changes include passivity, loss  Video games are now being used in the treat- ment of traumatic brain injury.  table   14.6  Predictors of Clinical Outcome After Traumatic Brain Injury  Outcome is more favorable when there is:  •   only a short period of unconsciousness or posttraumatic  anterograde amnesia  •   minimal cognitive impairment •   a well-functioning preinjury personality •   higher educational attainment •   a stable preinjury work history •   motivation to recover or make the most of residual capacities •   a favorable life situation to which to return •   early intervention •   an appropriate program of rehabilitation and retraining  Sources: Bennett et al. (1997); Dikmen et al. (1994); Diller & Gordon (1981); Mackay (1994); and MacMillan et al. (2002).
of the variables that are associated with patients having a more favorable outcome after a TBI.  in review  •   Why is it so important to take concussions very seriously?  •   What is the link between the APOE-E4 allele and problems after head injury?  •   What kinds of clinical problems are associated with head injury in the short and longer term?  •   What factors are associated with the degree of disability after head injury?  unresolveD issues  Should Healthy People Use Cognitive Enhancers?  I n the search for a cognitive advantage, many healthy people, young and old, are now turning to drugs that may provide cognitive benefits. Many of us routinely use caffeine, which im- proves vigilance, working memory, and incidental learning. Others use nicotine, which, although clearly detrimental to health when smoked, may enhance attention, working memory, and attention in the short term (Husain & Mehta, 2011; Lanni et al., 2008). A more recent trend, however, involves the use of prescription stimulants. These include methylphenidate (Ritalin), which is used in the treatment of attention deficit disorder, and modafinil (Provigil), which is used as a wake-promoting agent for people with excessive daytime sleepiness. These compounds (which are not always legally prescribed) are now being used by students seeking better grades as well as by military personnel who need to remain awake during long missions. Studies suggest that physicians are disinclined to prescribe these medications to young, cognitively healthy people (Banjo et al., 2010). In part, this reluctance stems from concerns about the safety of these compounds and beliefs that the benefits they provide are very small. Certainly, evidence suggests that the benefits of cognitive enhancers in healthy individuals are indeed very modest. But there are ethical issues, too (Hyman, 2011; Lanni et al., 2008). Should drugs developed as treatments be used as cognitive enhancers in people who do not have the disorders the drugs were designed to help? What do you think? Would you take a drug approved for Alzheimer’s disease if you thought it would help you do better on a test? Who is most likely to have access to these cognitive enhancers? And will their use lead to a “cognitive arms race” rather like that in some professional sports where athletes who do not take steroids are highly disadvantaged? Is it possible that students of the future might be required to provide a urine sample before taking a high-stakes exam?  14.1   What forms of neurocognitive disorders are recog- nized in   DSM-5 ? What is presumed to be the cause of these disorders?  •   The   DSM-5   recognizes major and mild forms of neurocogni- tive disorders as well as delirium. These disorders are thought to result from transient or permanent damage to the brain. Chronic neurocognitive disorders involve the permanent loss of neural cells.  14.2   What are the clinical features of neurocognitive disorders?  •   Major neurocognitive disorders involves a loss of function and of previously acquired skills. Depending on the cause, the onset can be slow or gradual with a deteriorating course. The most common cause of major neurocognitive disorders is Alzheimer’s disease.  •   There is no simple relationship between the extent of brain dam- age and degree of impaired functioning. Some people who have severe damage develop no severe symptoms, whereas some with slight damage have extreme reactions.  14.3   What is delirium and how is it treated?  •   Delirium has a sudden onset. Common among the elderly, it is characterized by a state of awareness that fluctuates between wakefulness and stupor or coma. Delirium is treated with neuroleptic medications and also with benzodiazepines.  14   summary
14.4   What are the risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease? What changes in the brain are found in patients with Alzheimer’s disease?  •   Age is a major risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease as well as for other forms of dementia such as vascular dementia.  •   Genes play a major role in susceptibility to and risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Genetic mutations of the   APP ,   PS1 , and  PS2   genes are implicated in early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. The APOE-E4 allele of the   APOE   gene is also a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease.  •   The characteristic neuropathology of Alzheimer’s disease involves cell loss, plaques, and neurofibrillary tangles. Plaques contain a sticky protein called beta amyloid. Neurofibrillary tangles con- tain abnormal tau protein.  14.5   How is Alzheimer’s disease treated?  •   Alzheimer’s disease causes the destruction of cells that make acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter important for memory. Drug treatments for Alzheimer’s disease include cholinesterase inhibi- tors such as donepezil (Aricept). These drugs help stop ACh from being broken down and so make more of it available to the brain.  •   Any comprehensive treatment approach for neurocognitive dis- orders should also involve caregivers, who are often under a great deal of stress and have difficulty coping. They may benefit from medications as well as from support groups.  14.6   What is an amnestic disorder? What causes amnestic disorders?  •   Amnestic disorders involve severe memory loss. The most com- mon cause of amnestic disorders is chronic alcohol abuse.  •   Other causes include head trauma, stroke, surgery, infections, and hypoxia.  14.7   What are some of the clinical consequences of head trauma? What factors are related to the degree of impairment that results?  •   Head injuries can cause amnesia as well as other cognitive impairments. Retrograde amnesia is inability to recall events that preceded the trauma. Anterograde amnesia is inability to remem- ber things that follow it.  •   Although such inconsistencies are not completely understood, it appears that an individual’s premorbid personality and life situ- ation are important in determining his or her reactions to brain damage. The APOE-E4 genetic allele is also important. The severity of the trauma, age of the person who is injured, and site of the injury are also important.  key terms  Alzheimer’s disease   491  amnestic disorder   500  amyloid plaques   495  anterograde amnesia   502  APOE-E4 allele   494  delirium   488  dementia   484  early-onset Alzheimer’s disease   494  HIV-associated neurocognitive impairment   500  Huntington’s disease   491  Korsakoff’s syndrome   501  late-onset Alzheimer’s disease   494  major neurocognitive disorder   484  mild neurocognitive disorder   484  neurofibrillary tangles   496  Parkinson’s disease   490  retrograde amnesia   502  traumatic brain injury (TBI)   501  vascular dementia   500
15  learning objectives  15.1  How does maladaptive behavior appear in different life periods?  15.2  What are the common disorders of childhood?  15.3  Do anxiety and depression appear in children and adolescents?  15.4  What are some specific disorders that occur in childhood?  15.5  What are intellectual disabilities?  15.6  How can we plan better programs to help children and adolescents?  A Case of Adolescent Depression and Attempted Suicide   Emily is 15-year-old girl from a middle- class Caucasian background who had a history of depression during her childhood. She had periods of low mood, poor self- esteem, and social withdrawal. She also had symptoms of anxi- ety and was very reluctant to leave her home. During her year in the seventh grade, she became so fearful of going to school that she missed so many days she had to repeat the grade. She currently is in the eighth grade and has, to this point, missed a great deal of school. Her family became very concerned over Emily’s low mood and isolation, so they enrolled her in an out- patient treatment program for depression, anxiety episodes, and eating disorders. Her depression continued, and she became more isolated, lonely, and depressed and would not leave her room even for meals. One day her grandmother found her in their car in the garage with the engine running in an effort to end her life. Emily was admitted into an inpatient treat- ment program following her serious suicide attempt. There is a history of psychiatric problems, particularly mood disorders, in her family. Her mother has been hospitalized on three occasions for depression. Her maternal grandfather, now deceased, was hospitalized at one time following a manic depressive episode. In the early phases of her hospitalization, Emily underwent an extensive psychological and psychiatric evaluation. She was administered a battery of tests, including the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory for Adolescents (MMPI-A). She was cooperative with the evaluation and provided the assess- ment staff with sufficient information regarding her mood and attitudes to assist in developing a treatment program. Emily showed many symptoms of a mood disorder in which both depression and anxiety were prominent features. The psy- chological evaluation indicated that she was depressed, anxious, and felt unable to deal with the school stress that her condition prompted. Moreover, her physical appearance and eating behavior suggested the strong likelihood of anorexia nervosa. Emily showed an extreme degree of social introversion on several measures and acknowledged her reticence at engaging in social interactions. The assessment psychologist concluded that her personality character- istics of social withdrawal, isolation, and difficult interpersonal rela- tionships would likely result in her having problems in establishing a therapeutic relationship. Her treatment program involved support- ive cognitive therapy along with antidepressant medication. Although she endorsed a broad range of anxiety symptoms, in her testing and in the intake interview she endorsed few items regarding suicidal ideation. This was not sufficient evidence to support a conclusion that she was at less risk for suicide; how- ever, it could simply reflect her unwillingness to openly discuss her recent attempt. Her past behavior and low mood indicated a need to consider the possibility of further suicide attempts. She remained in inpatient treatment for 3 weeks and was discharged with the summary that she had shown substantial improvement. She was, however, referred for further psychologi- cal treatment on an outpatient basis. Source: Adapted from Williams & Butcher, 2011, pp. 151–63.  Until the twentieth century, little account was taken of the special characteristics of psychopathology in children; maladaptive pat- terns considered relatively specific to childhood, such as autism, received virtually no attention at all. Only since the advent of the mental health movement and the availability of child guidance facilities at the beginning of the twentieth century have marked strides been made in assessing, treating, and understanding the maladaptive behavior patterns of children and adolescents. The problems of childhood were initially seen simply as down- ward extensions of adult-oriented diagnoses. The prevailing view was one of children as “miniature adults.” But this view failed to recognize special problems, such as those associated with the devel- opmental changes that normally take place in childhood or adoles- cence. Only relatively recently have clinicians come to realize that they cannot fully understand childhood disorders without taking these developmental processes into account. Today, even though great progress has been made in providing treatment for disturbed children, facilities are still inadequate to the task, and most children with mental health problems do not receive psychological attention. The number of children affected by psychological problems is considerable. Research studies in several countries have provided estimates of childhood disorders. Roberts, Roberts, et al. (2007)
found that 17.1 percent of adolescents in large metropolitan areas of the United States meet the criteria for one or more   DSM   diag- noses. Verhulst (1995) conducted an evaluation of the overall prevalence of childhood disorder based on 49 studies involving over 240,000 children across many countries and found the average rate to be 12.3 percent. In most studies, maladjustment is found more commonly among boys than among girls; however, for some diagnostic problems, such as eating disorders (see Chapter 8), rates are higher for girls than for boys. The most prevalent disorders are attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (Ryan-Krause et al., 2010) and separation anxiety dis- orders (Cartwright-Hatton et al., 2006). Some subgroups of the population—for example, Native Americans—tend to have higher rates of mental disorders. One study reported that 23 percent of the Native American children rated in the sample met criteria for 1 of the 11 mental disorders in the survey and 9 percent met criteria for 2 or more of the disorders (Whitbeck et al., 2006).  Maladaptive Behavior in Different Life Periods  Several behaviors that characterize maladjustment or emotional disturbance are relatively common in childhood. Because of the manner in which personality develops, the various steps in growth and development, and the differing stressors people face in child- hood, adolescence, and adulthood, we would expect to find some differences in maladaptive behavior in these periods. The fields of developmental science (Hetherington, 1998) and, more specifi- cally,   developmental psychopathology   (Kim-Cohen, 2007) are devoted to studying the origins and course of individual maladap- tation in the context of normal growth processes. It is important to view a child’s behavior in the context of normal childhood development (Silk et al., 2000). We can- not consider a child’s behavior abnormal without determining whether the behavior in question is appropriate for the child’s age. For example, temper tantrums and eating inedible objects might be viewed as abnormal behavior at age 10 but not at age 2. Despite the somewhat distinctive characteristics of childhood disturbances at different ages, there is no sharp line of demarca- tion between the maladaptive behavior patterns of childhood and those of adolescence, or between those of adolescence and those of adulthood. Thus, although our focus in this chapter will be on the behavior disorders of children and adolescents, we will find some inevitable carryover into later life periods.  Varying Clinical Pictures  The clinical picture of childhood disorders tends to be distinct from the clinical picture of disorders in other life periods. Some of the emotional disturbances of childhood may be relatively short lived and less specific than those occurring in adult- hood. However, some childhood disorders severely affect future development. One study found that individuals who had been hospitalized as child psychiatric patients (between the ages of 5 and 17) died early in life due to unnatural causes (about twice the rate of the general population) when followed up from 4 to 15 years later (Kuperman et al., 1988). The suicide risk among some disturbed adolescents is long-lasting and requires careful follow-up and attention (Fortune et al., 2007). Suicidal thoughts are not uncommon in children. Riesch and colleagues (2008) report that 18 percent of sixth graders have thoughts of killing themselves. Two other recent studies have reported rates for chil- dren under age 15. Dervic, Brent, and Oquendo (2008) report that international suicide rates are 3.1 per million. Hawton and Harriss (2008) report that the long-term risk of suicide is 1.1 percent, with girls more likely than boys to commit suicide. Both studies report that difficult family relationships are the leading cause of suicidal behavior. Being bullied by another child is another factor that has been found to be associated with risk of suicide (Rivers & Noret, 2010).  Special Psychological Vulnerabilities of Young Children  Young children are especially vulnerable to psychological prob- lems (Ingram & Price, 2001). In evaluating the presence or extent of mental health problems in children and adolescents, one needs to consider the following:  • They do not have as complex and realistic a view of them - selves and their world as they will have later; they have less self- understanding; and they have not yet developed a stable sense of identity or a clear understanding of what is expected of them and what resources they might have to deal with problems.  • Immediately perceived threats are tempered less by considerations  of the past or future and thus tend to be seen as disproportion- ately important. As a result, children often have more difficulty than adults in coping with stressful events (Mash & Barkley, 2006). For example, children are at risk for posttraumatic stress disorder after a disaster, especially if the family atmosphere is troubled—a circumstance that adds additional stress to the prob- lems resulting from the natural disaster (Menaghan, 2010).  • Children’s limited perspectives, as might be expected, lead them  to use unrealistic concepts to explain events. For young children, suicide or violence against another person may be undertaken without any real understanding of the finality of death.  • Children also are more dependent on other people than are  adults. Although in some ways this dependency serves as a buf- fer against other dangers because the adults around him or her might “protect” a child against stressors in the environment, it also makes the child highly vulnerable to experiences of re- jection, disappointment, and failure if these adults, because of their own problems, ignore the child (Lengua, 2006).  • Children’s lack of experience in dealing with adversity can  make manageable problems seem insurmountable (Scott
et al., 2010). On the other hand, although their inexperience and lack of self-sufficiency make them easily upset by prob- lems that seem minor to the average adult, children typically recover more rapidly from their hurts.  The Classification of Childhood and Adolescent Disorders  Until the 1950s no formal, specific system was available for clas- sifying the emotional or behavioral problems of children and adolescents. Kraepelin’s (1883) classic textbook on the classifica- tion of mental disorders did not include childhood disorders. In 1952, the first formal psychiatric nomenclature ( DSM-I ) was published, and childhood disorders were included. This system was quite limited and included only two childhood emotional disorders: childhood schizophrenia and adjustment reaction of childhood. In 1966, the Group for the Advancement of Psychia- try provided a classification system for children that was detailed and comprehensive. Thus, in the 1968 revision of the   DSM  ( DSM-II ), several additional categories were added. However, growing concern remained—both among clinicians attempting to diagnose and treat childhood problems and among researchers attempting to broaden our understanding of childhood psycho- pathology—that the then-current ways of viewing psychological disorders in children and adolescents were inappropriate and inaccurate for several reasons. The greatest problem was that the same classification system that had been developed for adults was used for childhood problems even though many childhood dis- orders, such as autism, learning disabilities, and school phobias, have no counterpart in adult psychopathology. The early systems also ignored the fact that in childhood disorders, environmental factors play an important part in the expression of symptoms— that is, symptoms are highly influenced by a family’s acceptance or rejection of the behavior. In addition, symptoms were not considered with respect to a child’s developmental level. Some of the problem behaviors might be considered age appropriate, and troubling behaviors might simply be behaviors that the child will eventually outgrow. In the most recent revision of the diagnostic and statistical manual ( DSM-5 ), efforts were made to provide diagnostic classification that is consistent with current research and contemporary clinical practice.  in review  •   Define developmental psychopathology.  •   Discuss the special psychological vulnerabilities of children.  Common Disorders of Childhood  At present the   DSM-5   provides diagnoses for a large number of childhood and adolescent disorders or Neurodevelopmental Dis- orders. In addition, several disorders, involving intellectual dis- ability (formerly referred to as mental retardation) are included. Space limitations do not allow us to explore fully the mental disorders of childhood and adolescence included in the   DSM  system, so we have selected several disorders to illustrate the broad range of problems that can occur in childhood and adoles- cence. Some of these disorders are more transient than many of the abnormal behavior patterns of adulthood discussed in earlier chapters—and also perhaps more amenable to treatment while others have a likelihood of persistence.  Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder  Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) , often referred to as hyperactivity, is characterized by difficulties that interfere with effective task-oriented behavior in children— particularly impulsivity, excessive or exaggerated motor activity, such as aimless or haphazard running or fidgeting, and difficul- ties in sustaining attention (Nigg et al., 2005; see   DSM-5   Crite- ria for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder). The diagnostic criteria for ADHD remained relatively unchanged for children and adolescents in   DSM-5 . Children with ADHD are highly distractible and often fail to follow instructions or respond to demands placed on them (Wender, 2000). Perhaps as a result of their behavioral problems, children with ADHD are often lower in intelli- gence, usually about 7 to 15 IQ points below average (Barkley, 1997). Children with ADHD also tend to talk incessantly and to be socially intrusive and immature. Recent research has shown that many children with ADHD show deficits on neuropsychological testing that are related to poor academic function- ing (Biederman et al., 2004)   Watch   the  Video   Jimmy: Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder   on   MyPsychLab .  Children with ADHD generally have many social problems because of their impulsivity and overactiv- ity. Hyperactive children usually have great difficulty in getting along with their parents because they do not obey rules. Their behavior problems also result in their being viewed negatively by their peers (Hoza et al., 2005). In general, however, hyperactive children are not anxious, even though their overactivity, restless- ness, and distractibility are frequently interpreted as indications of anxiety. They usually do poorly in school and often show specific learning disabilities such as difficulties in reading or in learning other basic school subjects. Hyperactive children also pose behavior problems in the elementary grades. The case study on page 513 reveals a typical clinical picture. The symptoms of ADHD are relatively common among children seen at mental health facilities in the United States, with from 3 to 7 percent reported in the   DSM   and 8 percent reported in a recent study in the United Kingdom (Alloway et al., 2010). In fact, hyperactivity is the most frequently diag- nosed mental health condition in children in the United States (Ryan-Krause et al., 2010). The disorder occurs most frequently among preadolescent boys—it is six to nine times more prevalent
among boys than among girls. ADHD occurs with the greatest frequency before age 8 and tends to become less frequent and to involve briefer episodes thereafter. ADHD has also been found to be comorbid with other disorders such as oppositional defiant disorder (ODD) (Staller, 2006), which we discuss later. Some residual effects, such as attention difficulties, may persist into adolescence or adulthood (Odell et al., 1997). ADHD is found in other cultures (Bauermeister et al., 2010)—for example, one study of 1,573 children from 10 European countries reported that ADHD symptoms are similarly recognized across all  DSM- 5  criteria for  Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder  A.   A persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity- impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development, as characterized by (1) and/or (2):  1.   Inattention:   Six (or more) of the following symptoms have persisted for at least 6 months to a degree that is inconsistent with developmental level and that negatively impacts directly on social and academic/occupational activities:  Note:   The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppo- sitional behavior, defiance, hostility, or failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older adolescents and adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are required.  a.   Often fails to give close attention to details or makes care- less mistakes in schoolwork, at work, or during other activi- ties (e.g., overlooks or misses details, work is inaccurate).  b.   Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities (e.g., has difficulty remaining focused during lectures, conversations, or lengthy reading).  c.   Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly (e.g., mind seems elsewhere, even in the absence of any obvious distraction).  d.   Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish schoolwork, chores, or duties in the workplace (e.g., starts tasks but quickly loses focus and is easily sidetracked).  e.   Often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities (e.g., dif- ficulty managing sequential tasks; difficulty keeping mate- rials and belongings in order; messy, disorganized work; has poor time management; fails to meet deadlines).  f.   Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks that require sustained mental effort (e.g., schoolwork or homework; for older adolescents and adults, pre- paring reports, completing forms, reviewing lengthy papers).  g.   Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities (e.g., school materials, pencils, books, tools, wallets, keys, paperwork, eyeglasses, mobile telephones).  h.   Is often easily distracted by extraneous stimuli (for older adolescents and adults, may include unrelated thoughts).  i.   Is often forgetful in daily activities (e.g., doing chores, running errands; for older adolescents and adults, returning calls, paying bills, keeping appointments).  2   Hyperactivity and impulsivity:   Six (or more) of the follow- ing symptoms have persisted for at least 6 months to a degree that is inconsistent with developmental level and that negatively impacts directly on social and academic/ occupational activities:  Note:   The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppo- sitional behavior, defiance, hostility, or a failure to under- stand tasks or instructions. For older adolescents and adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are required.  a.   Often fidgets with or taps hands or feet or squirms in seat.  b.   Often leaves seat in situations when remaining seated is expected (e.g., leaves his or her place in the class- room, in the office or other workplace, or in other situations that require remaining in place).  c.   Often runs about or climbs in situations where it is inappropriate.   (Note:   In adolescents or adults, may be limited to feeling restless.)  d.   Often unable to play or engage in leisure activities quietly.  e.   Is often “on the go,” acting as if “driven by a motor” (e.g., is unable to be or uncomfortable being still for extended time, as in restaurants, meetings; may be experienced by others as being restless or difficult to keep up with).  f.   Often talks excessively.  g.   Often blurts out an answer before a question has been completed (e.g., completes people’s sentences; cannot wait for turn in conversation).  h.   Often has difficulty waiting his or her turn (e.g., while waiting in line).  i.   Often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., butts into conversations, games, or activities; may start using other people’s things without asking or receiving per- mission; for adolescents and adults, may intrude into or take over what others are doing).  B.   Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms were present prior to age 12 years.  C.   Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms are present in two or more settings (e.g., at home, school, or work; with friends or relatives; in other activities).  D.   There is clear evidence that the symptoms interfere with, or reduce the quality of, social, academic, or occupational func- tioning.  E.   The symptoms do not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., mood disorder, anxiety disorder, dissociative disorder, personality disorder, substance intoxication or withdrawal).  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.
countries studied and that the children are significantly impaired across a wide range of domains.  CAuSAl FACTorS IN ATTENTIoN-DEFICIT/HYPErACTIV- ITY DISorDEr   The cause or causes of ADHD in children have been much debated. It still remains unclear to what extent the disorder results from environmental or biological factors (Carr et al., 2006; Hinshaw et al., 2007), and recent research points to both genetic (Sharp et al., 2009; Ilott et al., 2010) and social environmental precursors (Hechtman, 1996). Many researchers believe that biological factors such as genetic inheri- tance will turn out to be important precursors to the develop- ment of ADHD (Durston, 2003). But firm conclusions about any biological basis for ADHD must await further research.  Gina, a Student with Hyperactivity   Gina was referred to a community clinic because of overactive, inattentive, and disruptive behavior. Her hyperactivity and uninhibited behav- ior caused problems for her teacher and for other students. She would impulsively hit other children, knock things off their desks, erase material on the blackboard, and damage books and other school property. She seemed to be in perpetual motion, talking, moving about, and darting from one area of the classroom to another. She demanded an inordinate amount of attention from her parents and her teacher, and she was intensely jealous of other children, including her own brother and sister. Despite her hyper- active behavior, inferior school performance, and other problems, she was considerably above average in intelligence. Nevertheless, she felt stupid and had a seriously devaluated self-image. Neurological tests revealed no significant organic brain disorder.  The search for psychological causes of ADHD has yielded similarly inconclusive results, although temperament and learn- ing appear likely to be factors. One study suggested that family pathology, particularly parental personality, can be transmitted to children (Goos et al., 2007), and another recent study found that prenatal alcohol exposure can increase the severity of prob- lems in children with ADHD (Ware et al., 2012). Currently, ADHD is considered to have multiple causes and effects (Hinshaw et al., 1997). Whatever cause or causes are ultimately determined to be influential in ADHD, the mechanisms under- lying the disorder need to be more clearly understood and explored. There is general agreement that processes operating in the brain are disinhibiting the child’s behavior (Nigg, 2001), and some research has found different EEG patterns occurring in children with ADHD than in children without ADHD (Barry et al., 2003). At this time, however, theorists do not agree what those central nervous system processes are.  TrEATmENTS AND ouTComES   Although the hyperactive syndrome was first described more than 100 years ago, disagree- ment over the most effective methods of treatment continues, especially regarding the use of drugs to calm a child with ADHD. Yet this approach to treating children with ADHD has great appeal in the medical community; one survey (Runnheim et al., 1996) found that 40 percent of junior high school children and 15 percent of high school children with emotional and be- havioral problems and ADHD are prescribed medication, mostly  Ritalin   (methylphenidate), an amphetamine. In fact, school nurses administer more daily medication for ADHD than for any other chronic health problem. Interestingly, research has shown that amphetamines have a quieting effect on children—just the opposite of what we would expect from their effects on adults. For children with ADHD, such stimulant medication decreases overactivity and distractibil- ity and, at the same time, increases their alertness (Konrad et al., 2004). As a result, they are often able to function much better at school (Hazell, 2007; Pelham et al., 2002). Fava (1997) concludes that Ritalin can often lower the amount of aggressiveness in children with ADHD. In fact, many children whose behavior has not been acceptable in regular classes can function and progress in a relatively normal manner when they use such a drug. In a 5-year follow-up study, Charach, Icko- wicz, and Schachar (2004) reported that children with ADHD on medication showed greater improvement in teacher-reported symptoms than nontreated children. The possible side effects of Ritalin, however, are numerous: decreased blood flow to the brain, which can result in impaired thinking ability and memory loss; disruption of growth hormone, leading to suppression of growth in the body and brain of the child; insomnia; psychotic symptoms; and others. Although amphetamines do not cure ADHD, they have reduced the behavioral symptoms in about one-half to two- thirds of the cases in which medication appears warranted. Ritalin has been shown to be effective in the short-term treat- ment of ADHD (Goldstein, 2009; Spencer, 2004a). There are newer variants of the drug, referred to as extended-release methyl- phenidate (Concerta), that have similar benefits but with available doses that may better suit an adolescent’s lifestyle (Mott & Leach, 2004; Spencer, 2004b). Three other medications for treating ADHD have received attention in recent years.   Pemoline   is chemically very different from Ritalin (Faigel & Heiligenstein, 1996); it exerts beneficial effects on classroom behavior by enhancing cognitive processing but has less adverse side effects (Bostic et al., 2000; Pelham et al., 2005).   Strattera   (atomoxetine), a noncontrolled treatment option that can be obtained readily, is an FDA-approved non- stimulant medication (FDA, 2002). This medication reduces the symptoms of ADHD (Friemoth, 2005), but its mode of operation is not well understood. The side effects for the drug are decreased appetite, nausea, vomiting, and fatigue. The devel- opment of jaundice has been reported, and the FDA (2004) has warned of the possibility of liver damage from using Strattera. Although Strattera has been shown to reduce some symptoms of ADHD, further research is needed to evaluate its effectiveness and potential side effects (Barton et al., 2005). Another drug
that reduces symptoms of impulsivity and hyperactivity in chil- dren with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder is   Adderall . This medication is a combination of amphetamine and dextro- amphetamine; however, research has suggested that Adderall has no advantage or improvement in results over Ritalin or Strattera (Miller-Horn et al., 2008). Although the short-term pharmacological effect of stimu- lants on the symptoms of hyperactive children is well established, their long-term effects are not well known (Safer, 1997a). Carlson and Bunner (1993) reported that studies of achievement over long periods of time failed to show that the medication has beneficial effects. The pharmacological similarity of Ritalin and cocaine, for example, has caused some investigators to be con- cerned about its use in the treatment of ADHD (Volkow et al., 1995). There have also been some reported recreational uses of Ritalin, particularly among college students. Kapner (2003) described several surveys in which Ritalin was reportedly abused on college campuses. In one survey, 16 percent of students at one university reported using Ritalin, and in another study 1.5 percent of the population surveyed reported using Ritalin for recreational purposes within the past 30 days. Some college stu- dents share the prescription medications of friends as a means of obtaining a “high” (Chutko et al., 2010). Some authorities prefer using psychological interventions in conjunction with medications (Mariani & Levin, 2007). The behavioral intervention techniques that have been developed for ADHD include selective reinforcement in the classroom (DuPaul et al., 1998) and family therapy (Everett & Everett, 2001). Another effective approach to treating children with ADHD involves the use of behavior therapy techniques featuring positive reinforcement and the structuring of learning materials and tasks in a way that minimizes error and maximizes immedi- ate feedback and success (Frazier & Merrill, 1998). An example is providing a boy with ADHD immediate praise for stopping to think through a task he has been assigned before he starts to do it. The use of behavioral treatment methods for ADHD has reportedly been quite successful, at least for short-term gains. The use of psychosocial treatment of ADHD has also shown positive results (Pelham & Fabiano, 2008; Corcoran, 2011). Van Lier and colleagues (2004) conducted a school-based behavioral intervention program using positive reinforcement aimed at pre- venting disruptive behavior in elementary school children. They found this program to be effective with children with ADHD with different levels of disorder but most effective with children at lower or intermediate levels. It is important to recognize that gender differences, as noted above, are found in ADHD, with the disorder being more promi- nent among boys than girls and the symptoms appraised differ- ently. Recent concerns have been expressed over the possibility that treatment of females with symptoms of ADHD might not be provided because they are more often diagnosed as “predomi- nantly inattentive” than boys. Rucklidge (2010) points out that females are less likely to be referred to treatment than males with ADHD although treatments appear to be equally effective for both genders. She points out that future research should be atten- tive to gender differences in the disorder and further examine potential differences that might occur in treatment and outcomes.  ADHD BEYoND ADolESCENCE   A number of changes were made to the diagnostic criteria of ADHD in the development of  DSM-5   in order to expand the diagnoses “across the life span.” Although the diagnostic criteria were not substantially changed for ADHD in   DSM-5 , some adjustments as to age level of the appearance of symptoms were modified to allow the diagnosis in adult years. Some researchers have reported that many children with ADHD retain symptoms and behavior into early adulthood. Kessler, Adler, and colleagues (2006) reported a prevalence rate of 4.4 percent in adult patients. Many children with ADHD go on to have other psychological problems such as overly aggressive behavior or substance abuse in their late teens and early adulthood (Barkley et al., 2004). For example, Carroll and Rounsaville (1993) found that 34.6 percent of treatment- seeking cocaine abusers in their study had met the criteria for ADHD when they were children. In a 30-year follow-up study of hyperactive boys with conduct problems, Satterfield and colleagues (2007) reported that such boys are at substantial increased risk for adult criminality. Biederman and colleagues (2010) conducted an 11-year follow-up study of girls with ADHD and found that girls with ADHD were at high risk for antisocial, addictive, mood, anxiety, and eating disorders. In another recent study, college students with ADHD have been shown to exhibit more on-the-job difficulties than peers with- out ADHD (Shifrin et al., 2010). In a recent follow-up study of children with ADHD, Klein and colleagues (2012) reported that compared with peers without ADHD, those with ADHD dis- played dysfunction in multiple domains as adults. Educational and occupational attainment was significantly compromised, leading to a relative economic disadvantage. More   longitudinal research   is clearly needed before we can conclude that children with ADHD go on to develop similar or other problems in adulthood. Mannuzza, Klein, and Moulton (2003) reported that estimates of the numbers of children with  research close-up  Longitudinal Research  Longitudinal research involves studying and collecting base- line information on a specific group of interest (patients with a given disorder, high-risk children, etc.) and then following up with them at a future date (e.g., 1, 5, or even 20 years later) to determine the changes that have occurred over the inter- vening period.
ADHD who will experience symptoms of ADHD in adulthood are likely to vary considerably. However, some of the research cited sug- gests that a significant percentage of adolescents continue to have problems in later life, and many continue to obtain treatment for ADHD (Doyle, 2006 ) or for other disorders such as major depres- sion or bipolar disorder in their adult years (Klassen et al., 2010).  Disruptive, Impulse-control, and Conduct Disorder  The next group of disorders involves a child’s or an adolescent’s relationship to social norms and rules of conduct. In both oppo- sitional defiant disorder and conduct disorder, aggressive or anti- social behavior is the focus. As we will see, oppositional defiant disorder is usually apparent by about age 8, and conduct disorder tends to be seen by age 9. These disorders are closely linked (Thomas, 2010). However, it is important to distinguish between persistent antisocial acts—such as setting fires, where the rights of others are violated—and the less serious pranks often carried out by normal children and adolescents. Also, oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder involve misdeeds that may or may not be against the law;   juvenile delinquency   is the legal term used to refer to violations of the law committed by minors. (See the Unresolved Issues section at the end of this chapter.)  THE ClINICAl PICTurE IN oPPoSITIoNAl DEFIANT DISorDEr   An important precursor of the antisocial behavior seen in children who develop conduct disorder is often what is now called   oppositional defiant disorder (ODD)   and catego- rized under Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disor- ders in   DSM-5 . The criteria for ODD were changed in DSM-5 somewhat from the DSM-IV disorder. The ODD disorder is now grouped into three subtypes: angry/irritable mood, argumenta- tive/defiant behavior and vindictiveness. Moreover, a severity rating has been included as an indicator of severity. The essential feature is a recurrent pattern of negativistic, defiant, disobedient, and hostile behavior toward authority figures that persists for at least 6 months. This disorder usually begins by the age of 8, whereas full-blown conduct disorders typically begin from middle childhood through adolescence. The lifetime prevalence of ODD as reported in a national sample of adult respondents was rela- tively high: 11.2 percent for boys and 9.2 percent for girls (Nock et al., 2007). Prospective studies have found a developmental sequence from oppositional defiant disorder to conduct disorder, with common risk factors for both conditions (Hinshaw, 1994). That is, virtually all cases of conduct disorder are preceded devel- opmentally by oppositional defiant disorder, but not all children with oppositional defiant disorder go on to develop conduct  DSM-5  criteria for  Conduct Disorder  A.   A repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior in which the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or rules are violated, as manifested by the presence of at least three of the following 15 criteria in the past 12 months from any of the categories below, with at least one criterion present in the past 6 months:  Aggression to People and Animals 1.   Often bullies, threatens, or intimidates others.  2.   Often initiates physical fights.  3.   Has used a weapon that can cause serious physical harm to others (e.g., a bat, brick, broken bottle, knife, gun).  4.   Has been physically cruel to people.  5.   Has been physically cruel to animals.  6.   Has stolen while confronting a victim (e.g., mugging, purse snatching, extortion, armed robbery).  7.   Has forced someone into sexual activity.  Destruction of Property 8.   Has deliberately engaged in fire setting with the intention of causing serious damage.  9.   Has deliberately destroyed others’ property (other than by fire setting).  Deceitfulness or Theft 10.   Has broken into someone else’s house, building, or car.  11.   Often lies to obtain goods or favors or to avoid obligations (i.e., “cons” others).  12.   Has stolen items of nontrivial value without confronting a victim (e.g., shoplifting, but without breaking and entering; forgery).  Serious Violations of rules 13.   Often stays out at night despite parental prohibitions, beginning before age 13 years.  14.   Has run away from home overnight at least twice while living in the parental or parental surrogate home, or once without returning for a lengthy period.  15.   Is often truant from school, beginning before age 13 years.  B.   The disturbance in behavior causes clinically significant impairment in social, academic, or occupational functioning.  C.   If the individual is age 18 years or older, criteria are not met for antisocial personality disorder.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.
disorder within a 3-year period (Lahey et al., 2000). The risk fac- tors for both include family discord, socioeconomic disadvantage, and antisocial behavior in the parents.  THE ClINICAl PICTurE IN CoNDuCT DISorDEr   The es- sential symptomatic behavior in   conduct disorder   and ODD involves a persistent, repetitive violation of rules and a disregard for the rights of others and is essentially the same as in   DSM-IV . Children with conduct disorder show a deficit in social behavior (Happe & Frith, 1996; see   DSM   Criteria for Conduct Disorder). In general, they manifest such characteristics as overt or covert hostility, disobedience, physical and verbal aggressiveness, quar- relsomeness, vengefulness, and destructiveness. Lying, solitary stealing, and temper tantrums are common. Such children tend to be sexually uninhibited and inclined toward sexual aggressive- ness. Some may engage in cruelty to animals (Becker et al., 2004), bullying (Coolidge et al., 2004), firesetting (Becker et al., 2004; Slavkin & Fineman, 2000; Stickle & Blechman, 2002), vandalism, robbery, and even ho-micidal acts. Children and adolescents with conduct disorder are also frequently comorbid for other disorders such as substance-abuse disorder (Goldstein et al., 2006) or depressive symptoms (O’Connor et al., 1998). Zoccolillo, Meyers, and Assiter (1997) found that conduct disor- der is a risk factor for unwed pregnancy and substance abuse in teenage girls. Goldstein and colleagues (2006) report that early- onset conduct disorder is highly associated with later development of antisocial personality disorder (see Chapter 8); Fergusson, Hor- wood, and Ridder (2007) and Yang and colleagues (2007) found that conduct disorder in childhood and adolescence is generally related to later substance use, abuse, and dependence.  CAuSAl FACTorS IN oPPoSITIoNAl DISorDEr AND CoNDuCT DISorDEr   Understanding of the factors associated with the development of conduct problems in childhood has in- creased tremendously in the past 20 years. Several factors will be covered in the sections that follow.  A Self-Perpetuating Cycle   Evidence has accumulated that a genetic predisposition (Simonoff, 2001) leading to low verbal intelligence, mild neuropsychological problems, and dif- ficult temperament can set the stage for early-onset conduct disorder. Baker and colleagues (2007) reported strong heritable effects of conduct problems and antisocal behavior across eth- nically and economically diverse samples. The child’s difficult temperament may lead to an insecure attachment because par- ents find it hard to engage in the good parenting that would promote a secure attachment. In addition, the low verbal intel- ligence and mild neuropsychological deficits that have been documented in many of these children—some of which may involve deficiencies in self-control functions such as sustaining attention, planning, self-monitoring, and inhibiting unsuccess- ful or impulsive behaviors—may help set the stage for a lifelong course of difficulties. In attempting to explain why the relatively mild neuropsychological deficits typically seen can have such pervasive effects, Moffitt and Lynam (1994) provided the fol- lowing scenario: A preschooler has problems understanding language and tends to resist his mother’s efforts to read to him. This deficit then delays the child’s readiness for school. When he does enter school, the typically busy curriculum does not allow teachers to focus their attention on students at his low readiness level. Over time, and after a few years of school fail- ure, the child will be chronologically older than his classmates, setting the stage for social rejection. At some point, the child might be placed into remedial programs that contain other pupils who have similar behavioral disorders as well as learning disabilities. This involvement with conduct-disordered peers exposes him to delinquent behaviors that he adopts in order to gain acceptance.  Age of onset and links to Antisocial Personality Disorder   Children who develop conduct disorder at an ear- lier age are much more likely to develop psychopathy or anti- social personality disorder as adults than are adolescents who develop conduct disorder suddenly in adolescence (Copeland et al., 2007). The link between conduct disorder and antisocial personality is stronger among lower-socioeconomic-class chil- dren (Lahey et al., 2005). It is the pervasiveness of the problems first associated with oppositional defiant disorder and then with conduct disorder that forms the pattern associated with an adult diagnosis of psychopathy or antisocial personality. Although only about 25 to 40 percent of cases of early-onset conduct disorder go on to develop adult antisocial personality disorder, over 80 percent of boys with early-onset conduct disorder do continue to have multiple problems of social dysfunction (in friendships, intimate relationships, and vocational activities) even if they do not meet all the criteria for antisocial personality disorder.  Hostility and aggressive behavior have been found to play a role in the development of conduct disorder. Children who develop this disorder early in childhood are at special risk for problems later in life.
By contrast, most individuals who develop conduct disorder in adolescence do not go on to become adult psychopaths or anti- social personalities but instead have problems limited to the ado- lescent years. These adolescent-onset cases also do not share the same set of risk factors that the child-onset cases have, including low verbal intelligence, neuropsychological deficits, and impul- sivity and attentional problems.  Psychosocial Factors   In addition to the genetic or con- stitutional liabilities that may predispose a person to develop conduct disorder and adult psychopathy and antisocial per- sonality, Kazdin (1995) underscored the importance of family and social context factors as causal variables. Children who are aggressive and socially unskilled are often rejected by their peers, and such rejection can lead to a spiraling sequence of social interactions with peers that exacerbates the tendency toward antisocial behavior (Freidenfelt & Klinteberg, 2007). Severe conduct problems can lead to other mental health problems as well. Mason and colleagues (2004) found that children who report higher levels of conduct problems are nearly four times more likely to experience a depressive epi- sode in early adulthood. This socially rejected subgroup of aggressive children is also at the highest risk for adolescent delinquency and prob- ably for adult antisocial personality. In addition, parents and teachers may react to aggressive children with strong negative affect such as anger (Capaldi & Patterson, 1994), and they may in turn reject these aggressive children. The combina- tion of rejection by parents, peers, and teachers leads these children to become isolated and alienated. Not surprisingly, they often turn to deviant peer groups for companionship, at which point a good deal of imitation of the antisocial behav- ior of their deviant peer models may occur. Investigators generally seem to agree that the family setting of a child with conduct disorder is typically characterized by ineffective parenting, rejection, harsh and inconsistent discipline, and parental neglect (Frick, 1998). Frequently, the parents have an unstable marital relationship, are emotionally disturbed or sociopathic, and do not provide the child with consistent guid- ance, acceptance, or affection. Even if the family is intact, a child in a conflict-charged home feels overtly rejected. For example, Rutter and Quinton (1984) concluded that family discord and hostility are the primary factors defining the relationship between disturbed parents and disturbed children; this is particu- larly true with respect to the development of conduct disorders in children and adolescents. Such discord and hostility contrib- ute to poor and ineffective parenting skills, especially ineffective discipline and supervision. These children are “trained” in anti- social behavior by the family—directly via coercive interchanges and indirectly via lack of monitoring and consistent discipline (Capaldi & Patterson, 1994). This all too often leads to associa- tion with deviant peers and the opportunity for further learning of antisocial behavior. In addition to these familial factors, a number of broader psychosocial and sociocultural variables increase the probabil- ity that a child will develop conduct disorder and, later, adult psychopathy or antisocial personality disorder (Granic & Patterson, 2006) or depressive disorder (Boylan et al., 2010). Low socioeconomic status, poor neighborhoods, parental stress, and depression all appear to increase the likelihood that a child will become enmeshed in this cycle (Schonberg & Shaw, 2007).  TrEATmENTS AND ouTComES   By and large, our society tends to take a punitive, rather than a rehabilitative, attitude toward an antisocial, aggressive youth. Thus the emphasis is on punishment and on “teaching the child a lesson.” Such treatment, however, seems to intensify rather than correct the behavior. Treatment for oppositional defiant disorder and con- duct disorder tends to focus on the dysfunctional family pat- terns described above and on finding ways to alter the child’s aggressive or otherwise maladaptive behaviors (Behan & Carr, 2000; Milne et al., 2001).  The Cohesive Family model   Therapy for a child with conduct disorder is likely to be ineffective unless some way can be found to modify the child’s environment. One interesting and often effective treatment strategy with conduct disorder is the cohesive family model (Granic & Patterson, 2006; Patterson et al., 1998). In this family-group-oriented approach, parents of children with conduct disorder are viewed as lacking in parenting skills and as behaving in inconsistent ways, thereby reinforcing inappropriate behavior and failing to socialize their children. Children learn to escape or avoid parental criticism by escalating their negative behavior. This tactic, in turn, increases their parents’ aversive interactions and criticism. The child  Ineffective parenting, harsh and inconsistent discipline, parental neglect, and marital discord can all con- tribute to opposi- tional defiant disorder (ODD) and conduct disorders. So can poverty and parental stress and depression.
observes the increased anger in his or her parents and models this aggressive pattern. The parental attention to the child’s negative, aggressive behavior actually serves to reinforce that behavior instead of suppressing it. Viewing conduct problems as emerging from such interactions places the treatment focus squarely on the interaction between the child and the parents (Patterson et al., 1991). Obtaining treatment cooperation from parents who are themselves in conflict with each other is difficult. Often, an over- burdened parent who is separated or divorced and working sim- ply does not have the resources, the time, or the inclination to learn and practice a more adequate parental role (Clarke-Stewart et al., 2000). In more extreme cases, the circumstances may call for a child to be removed from the home and placed in a foster home or institution, with the expectation of a later return to the home if intervening therapy with the parent or parents appears to justify it (Hahn et al., 2005). Unfortunately, children who are removed to new environ- ments often interpret this removal as further rejection not only by their parents but by society as well. Unless the changed envi- ronment offers a warm, kindly, and accepting yet consistent and firm setting, such children are likely to make little progress (see Pumariega, 2007).  Behavioral and Biologically Based Treatments   The effectiveness of behavior therapy techniques and biologically based treatments has made the outlook brighter for children with conduct disorder (Kazdin & Weisz, 2003). A recent study of treating depression and oppositional defiant behavior with the antidepressant medication, fluoxetine (Prozac), and cognitive behavior therapy found a reduction in oppositionality over those not receiving the medication (Jacobs et al., 2010). Teaching control techniques to the parents of such children is particularly important so that they can function as therapists in reinforcing desirable behavior and modifying the environ- mental conditions that have been reinforcing maladaptive behavior in their children. The changes brought about when parents consistently accept and reward their child’s positive behavior and stop focusing on the negative behavior may finally change their perception of and feelings toward the child, leading to the basic acceptance that the child has so badly needed. Although effective tactics for behavioral management can be taught to parents, they often have difficulty carrying out treat- ment plans. If this is the case, other techniques, such as family therapy or parental counseling, are used to ensure that the par- ent or person responsible for the child’s discipline is sufficiently assertive to follow through on the program.  in review  •   Describe two common anxiety disorders found in children and adolescents.  •   Distinguish among conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disor- der, and juvenile delinquency.  Anxiety and Depression in Children and Adolescents  Anxiety Disorders of Childhood and Adolescence  In modern society, no one is totally insulated from anxiety- producing events or situations, and the experience of traumatic events can predispose children to develop anxiety disorders (Shevlin et al., 2007). Most children are vulnerable to fears and uncertainties as a normal part of growing up, and children can get generalized panic disorder just as adults do. Children with anxiety disorders, however, are more extreme in their behavior than those experiencing “normal” anxiety. These children appear to share many of the following characteristics: oversensitiv- ity, unrealistic fears, shyness and timidity, pervasive feelings of inadequacy, sleep disturbances, and fear of school (Goodyer, 2000). Children diagnosed as suffering from an anxiety disorder typically attempt to cope with their fears by becoming overly dependent on others for support and help. In the   DSM-5 , anxi- ety disorders of childhood and adolescence are classified similarly to anxiety disorders in adults (Albano et al., 1996). Research has shown that anxiety disorders are often comorbid with depressive disorders (Kendall et al., 2010; O’Neil et al., 2010) or may be influential in later depression (Silberg et al., 2001); children who have these comorbid conditions often have significantly more symptoms than children who have anxiety disorders without depression (Masi et al., 2000). Anxiety disorders are common among children. In a recent review of the epidemiological studies of anxiety in children, Pine and Klein (2010) conclude that the prevalence for any anxiety disorder accompanied by impairment appears to be about 5 to 10 percent. For example, 9.7 percent of children in one commu- nity-based school sample clearly met diagnostic criteria for an anxiety-based disorder (Dadds et al., 1997). There is a greater preponderance of anxiety-based disorder in girls than in boys (Lewinsohn et al., 1998). And, among adolescents, Goodwin and Gotlib (2004b) reported that panic attacks occurred in 3.3 percent of a large community-based epidemiological study.  SEPArATIoN ANxIETY DISorDEr   Separation anxiety disorder , classified under Anxiety Disorders in   DSM-5 , is the most common of the childhood anxiety disorders, reportedly oc- curring in 2 to 41 percent of children in past population health studies (Cartwright-Hatton et al., 2006). Children with separa- tion anxiety disorder exhibit unrealistic fears, oversensitivity, self-consciousness, nightmares, and chronic anxiety. They lack self-confidence, are apprehensive in new situations, and tend to be immature for their age. Such children are described by their parents as shy, sensitive, nervous, submissive, easily discour- aged, worried, and frequently moved to tears. Typically, they are overly dependent, particularly on their parents. The essential feature in the clinical picture of this disorder is excessive anxiety
about separation from major attachment figures, such as their mother, and from familiar home surroundings (Bernstein & Layne, 2006). In many cases, a clear psychosocial stressor can be identified, such as the death of a relative or a pet. The case study below illustrates the clinical picture in this disorder.  Johnny’s Severe Separation Anxiety   Johnny was a highly sensitive 6-year-old who suffered from numerous fears, nightmares, and chronic anxiety. He was terrified of being sepa- rated from his mother, even for a brief period. When his mother tried to enroll him in kindergarten, he became so upset when she left the room that the principal arranged for her to remain in the classroom. After 2 weeks, however, this arrangement had to be discontinued, and Johnny had to be withdrawn from kindergarten because his mother could not leave him even for a few minutes. Later, when his mother attempted to enroll him in the first grade, Johnny manifested the same intense anxiety and unwillingness to be separated from her. At the suggestion of the school counselor, Johnny’s mother brought him to a community clinic for assistance with the problem. The therapist who initially saw Johnny and his mother was wearing a white clinic jacket, which led to a severe panic reaction on Johnny’s part. His mother had to hold him to  When children with separation anxiety disorder are actually separated from their attachment figures, they typically become preoccupied with morbid fears, such as the worry that their parents are going to become ill or die.  DSM-5  criteria for  Separation Anxiety Disorder  A.   Developmentally inappropriate and excessive fear or anxiety concerning separation from those to whom the individual is attached, as evidenced by at least three of the following:  1.   Recurrent excessive distress when anticipating or experi- encing separation from home or from major attachment figures.  2.   Persistent and excessive worry about losing major attach- ment figures or about possible harm to them, such as illness, injury, disasters, or death.  3.   Persistent and excessive worry about experiencing an untoward event (e.g., getting lost, being kidnapped, having an accident, becoming ill) that causes separation from a major attachment figure.  4.   Persistent reluctance or refusal to go out, away from home, to school, to work, or elsewhere because of fear of separation.  5.   Persistent and excessive fear of or reluctance about being alone or without major attachment figures at home or in other settings.  6.   Persistent reluctance or refusal to sleep away from home or to go to sleep without being near a major attachment figure.  7.   Repeated nightmares involving the theme of separation.  8.   Repeated complaints of physical symptoms (e.g., head- aches, stomachaches, nausea, vomiting) when separation from major attachment figures occurs or is anticipated.  B.   The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, lasting at least 4 weeks in children and adolescents and typically 6 months or more in adults.  C.   The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impair- ment in social, academic, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  D.   The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as refusing to leave home because of exces- sive resistance to change in autism spectrum disorder; delu- sions or hallucinations concerning separation in psychotic disorders; refusal to go outside without a trusted companion in agoraphobia; worries about ill health or other harm befall- ing significant others in generalized anxiety disorder; or concerns about having an illness in illness anxiety disorder.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.
keep him from running away, and he did not settle down until the therapist removed his jacket. Johnny’s mother explained that he was terrified of doctors and that it was almost impossible to get him to a physician even when he was sick.  When children with separation anxiety disorder are actually separated from their attachment figures, they typically become preoccupied with morbid fears, such as the worry that their parents are going to become ill or die. They cling helplessly to adults, have difficulty sleeping, and become intensely demand- ing. Separation anxiety is more common in girls (Bernstein & Layne, 2006), and the disorder is not very stable over time (Poulton et al., 2001). One study, for example, reported that 44 percent of youngsters showed recovery at a 4-year follow-up (Cantwell & Baker, 1989). However, some children go on to exhibit school refusal problems (a fear of leaving home and par- ents to attend school) and continue to have subsequent adjust- ment difficulties. A disproportionate number of children with separation anxiety disorder also experience a high number of other anxiety-based disorders such as phobia and obsessive- compulsive disorder (Egger et al., 2003; Kearney et al., 2003).  CAuSAl FACTorS IN ANxIETY DISorDErS   A number of causal factors have been emphasized in explanations of the child- hood anxiety disorders. Although genetic factors have been thought to contribute to the development of anxiety disorders, particularly obsessive-compulsive disorder, in children (Nestadt et al., 2010), social and cultural factors are likely to be influential in resulting in anxiety disorders in children. For example, Potochnick and Perreira (2010) found an increased risk of anxiety and depression among immigrant Latino youth. Parental behavior and family stress in minority families have been particularly noted as potential influen- tial factors in the origin of anxiety disorders in children; however, broader cultural factors are also important considerations. Anxious children often manifest an unusual constitutional sensitivity that makes them easily conditionable by aversive stimuli. For example, they may be readily upset by even small disappointments—a lost toy or an encounter with an overeager dog. They then have a harder time calming down, a fact that can result in a build-up and generalization of surplus fear reactions. The child can become anxious because of early illnesses, acci- dents, or losses that involved pain and discomfort. The traumatic effect of experiences such as hospitalizations makes such children feel insecure and inadequate. The traumatic nature of certain life changes such as moving away from friends and into a new situation can also have an intensely negative effect on a child’s adjustment. Overanxious children often have the modeling effect of an overanxious and protective parent who sensitizes a child to the dangers and threats of the outside world. Often, the parent’s overprotectiveness communicates a lack of confidence in the child’s ability to cope, thus reinforcing the child’s feelings of inadequacy (Woodruff-Borden et al., 2002). Indifferent or detached parents (Chartier et al., 2001) or rejecting parents (Hudson & Rapee, 2001) also foster anxiety in their children. The child may not feel adequately supported in mastering essential competencies and in gaining a positive self- concept. Repeated experiences of failure stemming from poor learning skills may lead to subsequent patterns of anxiety or with- drawal in the face of “threatening” situations. Other children may perform adequately but may be overcritical of themselves and feel intensely anxious and devalued when they perceive themselves as failing to do well enough to earn their parents’ love and respect. The role that social-environmental factors might play in the development of anxiety-based disorders, though important, is not clearly understood. A cross-cultural study of fears (Ollendick et al., 1996) found significant differences among American, Australian, Nigerian, and Chinese children and adolescents. These authors suggest that cultures that favor inhibition, compliance, and obedi- ence appear to increase the levels of fear reported. In another study in the United States, Last and Perrin (1993) reported that there are some differences between African American and white children with respect to types of anxiety disorders. White children are more likely to present with school refusal than are African American children, who show more PTSD symptoms. This difference might result from differing patterns of referral for African American and white families, or it might reflect differing environmental stressors placed on the children. Several studies have also reported a strong association between exposure to violence and a reduced sense of security and psychological well-being (Cooley-Quille et al., 2001). Children who experience a sense of diminished control over nega- tive environmental factors may become more vulnerable to the development of anxiety than those children who achieve a sense of efficacy in managing stressful circumstances.  TrEATmENTS AND ouTComES   The anxiety disorders of childhood occasionally continue into adolescence and young adulthood, leading first to maladaptive avoidance behavior and later to increasingly idiosyncratic thinking and behavior or an inability to “fit in” with a peer group. Typically, however, this is not the case. As affected children grow and have wider interac- tions in school and in activities with peers, they often benefit from experiences such as making friends and succeeding at given tasks. Teachers who are aware of the needs of both overanxious and shy, withdrawn children are often able to ensure that they will have successful experiences that help alleviate their anxiety.  Biologically Based Treatments   Psychopharmacological treatment of anxiety disorders in children and adolescents is becoming more common today (Vitiello & Waslick, 2010). Birmaher and colleagues (2003) evaluated the efficacy of using fluoxetine in the treatment of a variety of anxiety-based disorders and found the medication useful. However, the cautious use of medications with anxiety-based disorders involves obtaining diagnostic clarity since these conditions often coexist with other disorders.
Psychological Treatment   Behavior therapy procedures, sometimes used in school settings, often help anxious children (Mash & Barkley, 2006). Such procedures include assertiveness training to provide help with mastering essential competencies and desensitization to reduce anxious behavior. Kendall and colleagues have reported the successful use of manual-based cognitive-behav- ioral treatment (well-defined procedures using positive reinforce- ment to enhance coping strategies to deal with fears) for children with anxiety disorders (Chu & Kendall, 2004). Behavioral treat- ment approaches such as desensitization must be explicitly tailored to a child’s particular problem, and in vivo methods (using real- life situations graded in terms of the anxiety they arouse) tend to be more effective than having the child “imagine” situations. Svensson, Larsson, and Oest (2002) reported successful treatment of phobic children using brief exposure. Cognitive behavioral therapy has been shown to be highly effective at reducing anxiety symptoms in young children (Legerstee et al., 2010; Hirshfeld-Becker et al., 2010). An inter- esting and effective cognitive-behavioral anxiety prevention and treatment study was implemented in Australia. In an effort to identify and reduce anxiousness in young adolescents, Dadds and colleagues (1997) identified 314 children who met the cri- teria for an anxiety disorder out of a sample of 1,786 children 7 to 14 years old in a school system in Brisbane, Australia. They contacted the parents of these anxious children to engage them in the treatment intervention, and the parents of 128 of the chil- dren agreed to participate. The treatment intervention involved holding group sessions with the children in which they were taught to recognize their anxious feelings and deal with them more effectively than they otherwise would have. In addition, the parents were taught behavioral management procedures to deal more effectively with their child’s behavior. Six months after therapy was completed, significant anxiety reduction was shown for the treatment group compared with an untreated control sample.  Childhood Depression and Bipolar Disorder  Childhood depression includes behaviors such as withdrawal, crying, avoidance of eye contact, physical complaints, poor appe- tite, and even aggressive behavior and in some cases suicide (Pfeffer, 1996a, 1996b). One epidemiological study (Cohen et al., 1998) reported an association between somatic illness and childhood depressive illness, suggesting that there may be some common etiologic factors. In the past, childhood depression has been classified according to essentially the same   DSM   diagnostic criteria used for adults. However, research on the neurobiological correlates and treatment responses of children, adolescents, and adults has shown clear differences in hormonal levels and in the response to treatment (Kaufman et al., 2001). Gaffrey and col- leagues (2011) recently reported an fMRI study indicating that depressed preschoolers exhibit a significant positive relationship between depression severity and right amygdala activity when viewing facial expressions of negative affect. Future neuroimaging studies are needed to explore these differ- ences further. One modification used for diagnosing depression in children is that irritability is often found as a major symptom and can be substituted for depressed mood, as seen in the following case.  The Unhappy Child   Joey is a 10-year-old boy whose mother and teacher have shared their concerns about his irritabil- ity and temper tantrums displayed both at home and at school. With little provocation, he bursts into tears and yells and throws objects. In class he seems to have difficulty concentrating and seems easily distracted. Increasingly shunned by his peers, he plays by himself at recess, and at home he spends most of his time in his room watching TV. His mother notes that he has been sleeping poorly and has gained 10 pounds over the past couple of months from constant snacking. A consultation with the school psychologist has ruled out learning disabilities and attention-def- icit disorder; instead, she says, he is a deeply unhappy child who expresses feelings of worthlessness and hopelessness—and even a wish that he would die. These experiences probably began about 6 months ago when his father, divorced from Joey’s mother for several years, remarried and moved to another town, with the result that he spends far less time with Joey. Source: Adapted from Hammen & Rudolph, 1996, pp. 153–54.  Depression in children and adolescents occurs with high frequency. The overall prevalence rates are as follows: under age 13, 2.8 percent; ages 13 to 18, 5.6 percent (girls, 5.9 percent; boys, 4.6 percent). These rates have been generally consistent over the past 30 years (Costello et al., 2006). Lewinsohn and colleagues (1993) report that 7.1 percent of the adolescents sur- veyed reported having attempted suicide in the past; in another  Childhood depression includes behaviors such as withdrawal, crying, avoiding eye contact, physical complaints, poor appetite, and in some extreme cases, aggressive behavior and suicide.
epidemiological study, Lewinsohn, Rohde, and Seeley (1994) point out that 1.7 percent of adolescents between 14 and 18 had made a suicide attempt. There is an increased use of bipolar diagnosis among chil- dren and adolescents in the United States (see Developments in Research, p. 523). Moreno and colleagues (2007) reported that the estimated annual number of youth office-based visits with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder increased from 25 (1994–1995) to 1,003 (2002–2003) visits per 100,000 population, as did adult visits, with the majority of visits by males (66.5). A high percentage of these adolescents received a comorbid diagnosis, frequently ADHD.  CAuSAl FACTorS IN CHIlDHooD DEPrESSIoN   The causal factors implicated in the childhood anxiety disorders are pertinent to the depressive disorders as well.  Biological Factors   There appears to be an association between parental depression and behavioral and mood prob- lems in children (Halligan et al., 2007; Hammen et al., 2004). Children of parents with major depression are more impaired, receive more psychological treatment, and have more psycho- logical diagnoses than children of parents with no psychological disorders (Kramer et al., 1998). This is particularly the case when the parent’s depression affects the child through less-than- optimal interactions (Carter et al., 2001). A controlled study of family history and onset of depression found that children from mood-disordered families had significantly higher rates of depression than those from nondisordered families (Kovacs et al., 1997). The suicide attempt rate has also been shown to be higher for children of depressed parents (7.8 percent) than for the offspring of control parents (Weissman et al., 1992). Other biological factors might also make children vulnerable to psychological problems like depression. These factors include biological changes in the neonate as a result of alcohol intake by the mother during pregnancy, as prenatal exposure to alcohol is related to depression in children. M. J. O’Connor’s (2001) study of children exposed to alcohol in utero reveals a continu- ity between alcohol use by the mother and infant negative affect and early childhood depression symptoms. (See Developments in Research, p. 373 for a discussion of fetal alcohol syndrome.)  learning Factors   Learning maladaptive behaviors appears to be important in childhood depressive disorders, and there are likely to be learning or cultural factors in the expression of depression. Stewart, Kennard and colleagues (2004) reported that depression symptoms and hopelessness are higher in Hong Kong than in the United States. In addition, a number of studies have indicated that children’s exposure to early traumatic events can increase their risk for the development of depression. Children who have experienced past stressful events are susceptible to states of depression that make them vulnerable to suicidal thinking under stress (Silberg et al., 1999). Intense or persistent sensitiza- tion of the central nervous system in response to severe stress might induce hyperreactivity and alteration of the neurotransmit- ter system, leaving these children vulnerable to later depression (Heim & Nemeroff, 2001). A recent study by Olino and col- leagues (2010) found that temperamental emotionality was asso- ciated with having a depressed parent. Children who are exposed to negative parental behavior or negative emotional states may develop depressed affect themselves (Herman-Stahl & Peterson, 1999). For example, childhood depression has been found to be more common in divorced families (Palosaari & Laippala, 1996). One important area of research is focusing on the role of the mother–child interaction in the transmission of depressed affect. Specifically, investigators have been evaluating the possibility that mothers who are depressed transfer their low mood to their infants through their interactions with them (Jackson & Huang, 2000). Depression among mothers is not uncommon and can result from several sources, such as financial or marital problems. One study found that parenting problems and depressed mood in mothers are associated with depression in children (Oldehinkel et al., 2007). Depressed mothers do not respond effectively to their chil- dren (Goldsmith & Rogoff, 1997), and they tend to be less sen- sitively attuned to, and more negative toward, their infants than nondepressed mothers. Other research has shown that negative (depressed) affect and constricted mood on the part of a mother, which shows up as unresponsive facial expressions and irritable behavior, can produce similar responses in her infant (Tronick & Cohn, 1989). Interestingly, the negative impact of depressed mothers’ interaction style has also been studied at the physiologi- cal level. Infants have been reported to exhibit greater frontal brain electrical activity during the expression of negative emo- tionality by their mothers (Dawson et al., 1997). Although many of these studies have implicated the mother–child relationship in  Mothers who are depressed may transmit their depression to their chil- dren by their lack of responsiveness to the children as a result of their own depression (Bagner et al., 2010). Unfortunately, depression among mothers is all too common. Exhaustion, marital distress as a result of the arrival of children in a couple’s lives, delivery complications, and the dif- ficulties of particular babies may all play a part.
developments in research  Bipolar Disorder in Children and Adolescents: Is There an Epidemic?  B ipolar disorder is often characterized by extreme mood swings and aggressive, irritable behavior (Braaten, 2011). Until recent years it was thought to largely be a disorder occurring in adulthood. But in the late 1990s, many psychiatrists began applying the diagnosis to children and adolescents and prescribing bipolar medication for their treatment (see Geller & DelBello, 2008). In DSM-5, the diagnosis of childhood depression has been modified as a means of preventing the over-diagnosis of bipolar disorder in children. A new diagnosis, disruptive mood regulation disorder, has been included for children at or under age 18 who exhibit persistent irritability and frequent of lack behav- ioral control. Bipolar disorder is often comorbid with other disor- ders such as ADHD (Klassen et al., 2010). Is there an epidemic of depression and bipolar disorder among children and adolescents?  As described in Chapter 7, bipolar disorders differ from uni- polar mood disorders by the presence of manic or hypomanic symptoms. A person who experiences a manic episode has a markedly elevated, euphoric, and expansive mood that is of- ten interrupted by occasional outbursts of intense irritability or even violence. In order to meet   DSM-5   diagnostic criteria, these extreme moods must persist for at least a week. In addition, three or more additional symptoms must occur in the same time period. There must also be significant impairment of life or so- cial functioning. Hospitalization is often necessary during manic episodes. In about two-thirds of cases, the manic episodes either immediately precede or immediately follow a depressive episode; in other cases, the manic and depressive episodes are separated by intervals of relatively normal functioning. Bipolar disorder occurs equally in males and females and usually starts in adolescence and young adulthood. The likelihood of a full re- covery from bipolar disorder is low even with the use of mood- stabilizing medications such as lithium because bipolar disorder is typically a recurrent condition that continues into adulthood. The   DSM-5   provides criteria to define bipolar disorder in chil- dren that are based on how the disorder typically appears in adults; however, there is not a specific childhood or adolescent bipolar condition in the present   DSM   manual. The diagnostic criteria for bipolar disorder have not changed over the past de- cade (McClellan et al., 2007), even though there is an increased use of the diagnosis among children and adolescents in the United States, as noted by recent news media reports (Carey, 2007) as well as recent research surveys. The question of overdiagnosis of bipolar disorder in children has emerged, in part, because of the increased use of antidepres- sant prescriptions for children and adolescents. For example, Harris (2005) points out that during a recent 3-month period in the child assessment unit at Cambridge Hospital in Massachu- setts, a quarter of the children ages 3 to 13 years who were in her care had been given a diagnosis of bipolar disorder by their outpatient clinicians and were receiving mood stabilizers or antipsychotics. Another quarter were believed to have bipolar disorder by their parents, who requested that appropriate medi- cations be started. A number of authorities, however, have ques- tioned the extreme increase in the use of bipolar diagnoses for children and adolescents and the more extensive use of medica- tions for treating bipolar disorder among young people. Does the increased rate of bipolar diagnosis for young people result from changes in practice in which clinicians are using the diagnosis more? Or, are younger people acquiring the disorder more commonly? Or, are practitioners now recognizing more patients with the disorder that they had “missed” in the past? Many experts theorize that the increase reflects the fact that doctors are more aggressively applying the diagnosis to chil- dren, not an indication that the incidence of the disorder has in- creased. Blader and Carlson (2007) point out that the growth in the rate of bipolar disorder–diagnosed discharges might reflect a “progressive rebranding” of the same clinical phenomena for which hospitalized children previously received different diag- noses such as ADHD. Basing their conclusions on data from the National Hospital Discharge Survey, Blader and Carlson reported that the rate of bipolar diagnoses jumped from 10.0 percent to 34.1 percent for all pediatric psychiatric discharges during the study period, and it rose from 10.2 percent to 25.9 percent in adolescents. They concluded that the rate for discharge diag- nosis of bipolar disorder in children has increased by 25 percent annually. The reported increase in depression and bipolar disorder among children and adolescents has, however, been questioned by some studies. For example, using published rates of admission in epidemiological research in the United Kingdom, Costello, Erkanli, and Angold (2006) report different results. They con- ducted a meta-analysis of 26 epidemiological studies on children born between 1965 and 1996 that included nearly 60,000 inter- views that allowed for a diagnosis of depression and concluded that there is not an increased prevalence of adolescent depres- sion over the past 30 years. Several authorities have advised caution in the use of bipolar diagnoses in children and adolescents. Harris (2005) points out that child and adolescent psychiatrists must demand tighter criteria and higher quality of evidence in regard to juvenile bi- polar disorder in order to ensure diagnostic accuracy and also integrate these criteria into case formulations that lead to an effective treatment plan. One concern resulting from possible in- accurate diagnoses of bipolar disorder is that psychiatrists might overprescribe medications used in the treatment of bipolar dis- order (NIMH, 2007).
development of the disorder, depression in fathers has also been related to depression in children (Jacob & Johnson, 2001). Considerable evidence has accumulated that depressive symptoms are positively correlated with the tendency to attri- bute positive events to external, specific, and unstable causes and negative events to internal, global, and stable causes (Klein et al., 2008); with fatalistic thinking (Roberts et al., 2000); and with feelings of helplessness (Kistner et al., 2001). For example, the child may respond to peer rejection or teasing by concluding that he or she has some internal flaw.  TrEATmENTS AND ouTComES   The view that child- hood and adolescent depression is like adult depression has prompted researchers to treat children displaying mood dis- orders—particularly adolescents who are viewed as suicidal (Greenhill & Waslick, 1997)—with medications that have worked with adults. Research on the effectiveness of antide- pressant medications with children is both limited (Emslie & Mayes, 2001) and contradictory at best, and some studies have found antidepressants to be only moderately helpful (Wagner & Ambrosini, 2001). Some studies using fluoxetine (Prozac) with depressed adolescents have shown the drug to be more effective than a placebo (DeVane & Sallee, 1996; Emslie et al., 1997), and other research has shown fluoxetine to be effec- tive in the treatment of depression when administered as part of cognitive-behavioral therapy (Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study [TADS] Team, U.S., 2004), although complete remission of symptoms was seldom obtained. Anti- depressant medications may also have some undesirable side effects (nausea, headaches, nervousness, insomnia, and even seizures) in children and adolescents. Four accidental deaths from a drug called desipramine have been reported (Campbell & Cueva, 1995). Emslie, Croarkin, and Mayes (2010) recently pointed out that antidepressants are among the most widely used drugs in treating children and adolescents for a variety of disorders, with significant increases over the past 20 years. Primarily, antidepressants are used for the same disorders as in adults (i.e., depression, anxiety). Depressed mood has come to be viewed as an important risk factor in suicide among children and adolescents. About 7 to 10 percent of adolescents report having made at least one suicide attempt (Safer, 1997b). Children who attempt suicide are at greater risk for subsequent suicidal episodes than are non- attempters, particularly within the first 2 years after their initial attempt (Pfeffer et al., 1994), and some research has suggested that antidepressant medication treatment in children and adoles- cents is associated with an increased risk of suicide (Olfson et al., 2006). Among the childhood disorders, depression especially merits aggressive treatment. Recent attention is being paid to the increased potential of suicidal ideation and behavior in children and adolescents who are taking SSRIs for their depression (Whittington et al., 2004), and some risk of suicide for those taking the medication has been noted (Couzin, 2004). The extent to which these medications represent an additional threat of suicide is being investigated. An important facet of psychological therapy with children, whether for depression or anxiety or other disorders, is provid- ing a supportive emotional environment in which they can learn more adaptive coping strategies and more effective emo- tional expression (see Gillham et al., 2006). Older children and adolescents often benefit from a positive therapeutic relation- ship in which they can discuss their feelings openly (Harvey & Taylor, 2010). Younger children and those with less developed verbal skills may benefit from play therapy. Play therapy has been found to be an effective psychological treatment with children (Schaefer, 2010; Steele et al., 2007), particularly using a developmentally appropriate and skill-based approach (Reddy & Atamanoff, 2006). As a treatment technique, play therapy emerged out of efforts to apply psychodynamic therapy to chil- dren. Through their play, children often express their feelings, fears, and emotions in a direct and uncensored fashion, provid- ing a clinician with a clearer picture of problems and feelings (Perry & Landreth, 2001). Research has shown that play ther- apy is as effective as other types of treatment such as behavior therapy at engaging children in expressing problems. In one study, in which play therapy was integrated into an 8-week intervention program to treat children with conduct disorder, the subjects showed significant gains at a 2-year follow-up (McDonald et al., 1997). The predominant approach for treating depression in children and adolescents over the past few years has been the combined use of medication and psychotherapy (Skaer et al., 2000). Controlled studies of psychological treatment with depressed adolescents have shown significantly reduced symptoms with cognitive-behavioral therapy (Horowitz et al., 2007; Mash & Barkley, 2006). Short-term residen- tial treatment can also be effective with depressed children (Leichtman, 2006). A recent longitudinal follow-up study of adolescents who had been treated for depression showed that effective treatment can reduce the recurrence of depression (Beevers et al., 2007).  in review  •   How do the symptoms of childhood depression compare to those seen in adult depression?  •   Describe the symptoms of ADHD.  •   Identify four common symptom disorders that can arise in childhood.  Elimination Disorders (Enuresis, Encopresis), Sleepwalking, and Tics  The childhood disorders we will deal with in this section— “elimination disorders” (enuresis and encopresis), sleepwalking, and tics—typically involve a single outstanding symptom rather
has an important place in treating nocturnal enuresis in youngsters who have not responded well to behavioral treatment methods. It is good to remember that medications by themselves do not cure enuresis and that there is frequent relapse when the drug is discon- tinued or the child habituates to the medication (Dahl, 1992). Conditioning procedures have proved to be highly effective treatment for enuresis (Friman et al., 2008). Mowrer and Mowrer (1938), in their classic research that is still relevant today, introduced a procedure in which a child sleeps on a pad that is wired to a battery-operated bell. At the first few drops of urine, the bell is set off, thus awakening the child. Through conditioning, the child comes to associate bladder tension with awakening. Some evidence suggests that a biobehavioral approach—that is, using the urine alarm along with desmopressin—is most effective (Mellon & McGrath, 2000). With or without treatment, the incidence of enuresis tends to decrease significantly with age, but many experts still believe that enuresis should be treated in childhood because there is presently no way to identify which children will remain enuretic into adulthood (Goin, 1998). In an evaluation of research on the treatment of bed-wetting, Houts, Berman, and Abramson (1994) concluded that treated children are more improved at follow-up than nontreated children. They also found that learning-based procedures are more effective than medications.  Encopresis  The term   encopresis   describes a symptom disorder of children who have not learned appropriate toileting for bowel movements after age 4. This condition, classified under elimination disor- ders, in   DSM-5 , is less common than enuresis; however,   DSM - based estimates are that about 1 percent of 5-year-olds have encopresis. A study of 102 cases of encopretic children yielded the following list of characteristics: The average age of children with encopresis was 7, with a range of ages 4 to 13. About one- third of encopretic children were also enuretic, and a large sex difference was found, with about six times more boys than girls than a pervasive maladaptive pattern. These disorders are essen- tially the same in DSM-5 as in DM-IV-TR.  Enuresis  The term   enuresis   refers to the habitual involuntary discharge of urine, usually at night, after the age of expected continence (age 5). In   DSM-5 , functional enuresis is described as bed-wetting that is not organically caused and classified under elimination disorders. Children who have primary functional enuresis have never been continent; children who have secondary functional enuresis have been continent for at least a year but have regressed. Enuresis may vary in frequency, from nightly occurrence to occasional instances when a child is under considerable stress or is unduly tired. It has been estimated that some 4 to 5 million children and adolescents in the United States suffer from the inconvenience and embarrassment of this disorder. Estimates of the prevalence of enuresis reported in   DSM IV   are 5 to 10 per- cent among 5-year-olds, 3 to 5 percent among 10-year-olds, and 1.1 percent among children age 15 or older. An epidemiological study in China reported a 4.3 percent prevalence, with a signifi- cantly higher percentage of boys than girls (Liu et al., 2000). Enuresis may result from a variety of organic conditions, such as disturbed cerebral control of the bladder (Goin, 1998), neuro- logical dysfunction, other medical factors such as medication side effects (Took & Buck, 1996), or having a small functional bladder capacity and a weak urethral sphincter (Dahl, 1992). One group of researchers reported that 11 percent of their enuretic patients had disorders of the urinary tract (Watanabe et al., 1994). How- ever, most investigators have pointed to a number of other possible causal factors: (1) faulty learning, resulting in the failure to acquire inhibition of reflexive bladder emptying; (2) personal immaturity, associated with or stemming from emotional problems; (3) dis- turbed family interactions, particularly those that lead to sustained anxiety, hostility, or both; and (4) stressful events (Haug Schnabel, 1992). For example, a child may regress to bed-wetting when a new baby enters the family and becomes the center of attention. Medical treatment of enuresis typically centers on using medi- cations such as the antidepressant drug imipramine. The mecha- nism underlying the action of the drug is unclear, but it may simply lessen the deepest stages of sleep to light sleep, enabling the child to recognize bodily needs more effectively (Dahl, 1992). An intranasal desmopressin (DDAVP) has also been used to help children manage urine more effectively (Rahm et al., 2010). This medication, a hormone replacement, apparently increases urine concentration, decreases urine volume, and therefore reduces the need to urinate. The use of this medication to treat enuretic chil- dren is no panacea, however. Disadvantages of its use include its high cost and the fact that it is effective only with a small subset of enuretic children, and then only temporarily. Bath and colleagues (1996) reported that treatment with desmopressin was disappoint- ing but conclude that this treatment has some utility as a way to enable children to stay dry for brief periods of time—for example, at a camp or on a holiday. Moffatt (1997) suggested that DDAVP  When combined with medication such as desmopressin, a urine alarm (shown here) can be very effective in treating enuresis. The child sleeps with a wetness detector, which is wired to a battery-operated alarm in his or her undergarment. Through conditioning, the child comes to associate bladder tension with awakening.
and walked through the house. He did not remember the sleep- walking episode when he awoke the next morning. Assessment data revealed no neurological or other medical problems and indicated that he was of normal intelligence. He was, however, found to be a very anxious, guilt-ridden little boy who avoided performing assertive and aggressive behaviors appropriate to his age and sex (p. 23). The therapist focused treatment on having the boy’s mother awaken him each time he showed signs of an impending episode. After washing his face with cold water and making sure he was fully awake, the mother would return him to bed, where he was to hit and tear up a picture of the big black bug. (At the start of the treatment program, he had made several of these drawings.) Eventually, the nightmare was associated with awakening, and he learned to wake up on most occasions when he was hav- ing a bad dream. Thus the basic behavior therapy followed in this case was the same as that used in the conditioning treatment for enuresis, where a waking response is elicited by an intense stimulus just as urination is beginning and becomes associated with, and eventually prevents, nocturnal bed-wetting.  Tic Disorders  A   tic   is a persistent, intermittent muscle twitch or spasm, usually limited to a localized muscle group. The term is used broadly to include blinking the eye, twitching the mouth, licking the lips, shrugging the shoulders, twisting the neck, clearing the throat, blowing the nose, and grimacing, among other actions. Tic disorders are classified under motor disorders in   DSM-5 . Tics occur most frequently between the ages of 2 and 14 (Evans et al., 1996). In some instances, as in clearing the throat, an indi- vidual may be aware of the tic when it occurs, but usually he or she performs the act habitually and does not notice it. In fact, many individuals do not even realize they have a tic unless some- one brings it to their attention. A cross-cultural examination of tics found a similar pattern in research and clinical case reports from other countries (Staley et al., 1997). Moreover, the age of onset (average 7 to 8 years) and predominant gender (male) of cases were reported to be similar across cultures (Turan & Senol, 2000). A recent study on the prevalence of tic disorder in children and adolescents conducted by Stefanoff and colleagues (2008) reported that tic disorders are common among school- children. They found that the lifetime prevalence of tic disorders (TD) is 2.6 percent for transient tic disorder (TTD), 3.7 percent for chronic tic disorder (CTD), and 0.6 percent for Tourette dis- order (TD). The psychological impact that tics can have on an adoles- cent is illustrated in the following case.  The Adolescent Who Wanted to Be a Teacher   An adolescent who had wanted very much to be a teacher told the school counselor that he was thinking of giving up his plans. When asked why, he explained that several friends had told him that he had a persistent twitching of the mouth  in the sample. Many of the children soiled their clothing when they were under stress. A common time was in the late afternoon after school; few children actually had this problem at school. Most of the children reported that they did not know when they needed to have a bowel movement or were too shy to use the bathrooms at school. Many encopretic children suffer from constipation, so an important element in the diagnosis is a physical examination to determine whether physiological factors are contributing to the disorder. The treatment of encopresis usually involves both medical and psychological aspects. Several studies of the use of conditioning procedures with encopretic children have reported moderate treatment success; that is, no additional incidents occurred within 6 months following treatment (Friman et al., 2008). However, research has shown that a minority of children (11 to 20 percent) do not respond to learning-based treatment approaches (Keeley et al., 2009).  Sleepwalking  The onset of   sleepwalking disorder   is usually between the ages of 6 and 12. The disorder is classified in parasomnias in   DSM-5 . The symptoms of sleepwalking disorder involve repeated episodes in which a person leaves his or her bed and walks around without being conscious of the experience or remembering it later. The incidence of sleepwalking reported for children in the  DSM   is high for one episode—between 10 and 30 percent is rel- atively common—and girls are more likely to experience sleep- walking than boys (Mahendran et al., 2006). The incidence for repeated episodes is usually low—from 1 to 5 percent. Children subject to this problem usually go to sleep in a normal manner but arise during the second or third hour of sleep. They may walk to another room of the house or even outside, and they may engage in complex activities. Finally, they return to bed and in the morning remember nothing that had taken place. While moving about, sleepwalkers’ eyes are partially or fully open; they avoid obstacles, listen when spoken to, and ordinarily respond to commands, such as to return to bed. Shaking them will usually awaken sleepwalkers, and they will be surprised and perplexed at finding themselves in an unexpected place. Sleepwalking takes place during NREM (non–rapid eye movement) sleep, and sleepwalking episodes usually last only a few minutes (Plazzi et al., 2005). The causes of sleepwalking—a condition of arousal in which the subject arises from deep sleep, even displaying long, complex behavior including leaving the bed and walking, with memory impairment of the event—are not fully understood. Little attention has been devoted to the treatment of sleep- walking. Clement (1970), however, reported on the treatment of a 7-year-old boy through behavior therapy. During treatment, the therapist learned that just before each sleepwalking episode, the boy had a nightmare about being chased by “a big black bug.” After his nightmare began, he perspired freely, moaned and talked in his sleep, tossed and turned, and finally got up
behavioral intervention techniques have been used successfully in treating tics (Woods & Miltenberger, 2001). One success- ful program, habit reversal treatment or HRT, involves several sequential elements, beginning with awareness training, relax- ation training, and the development of incompatible responses, and then progressing to cognitive therapy and modification of the individual’s overall style of action (Chang, Piacentina, & Walkup, 2007). Finally, perfectionist expectations about self- image (which are often found in children and adolescents with tics) are addressed through cognitive restructuring. Because chil- dren with Tourette’s disorder can have substantial family adjust- ment (Wilkinson et al., 2001) and school adjustment problems (Nolan & Gadow, 1997), interventions should be designed to aid their adjustment and to modify the reactions of peers to them. School psychologists can play an effective part in the social adjustment of the child with Tourette’s disorder (Walter & Carter, 1997) by applying behavioral intervention strategies that help arrange the child’s environment to be more accepting of such unusual behaviors.  in review  •   What is functional enuresis? Describe a traditional and highly effective treatment for enuresis.  •   What is encropresis? Is this condition more common among boys or girls?  •   What is somnambulism?  Neurodevelopmental Disorders  The   neurodevelopmental disorders   are a group of severely disabling conditions that are among the most difficult to under- stand and treat. They make up about 3.2 percent of cases seen in inpatient settings (Sverd et al., 1995). They are considered to be the result of some structural differences in the brain that are usually evident at birth or become apparent as the child begins to develop (Siegel, 1996). There is fairly good diagnostic agree- ment in the determination of neuro developmental disorders in children whether one follows the   DSM-5   or the ICD-10 (the International Classification of Disease, published by the World Health Organization), which have slightly different criteria for some disorders. Several Neurodevelopmental disorders are cov- ered in   DSM-5 —for example,   autism spectrum disorder , one of the most severe and puzzling disorders occurring in early child- hood. (See Goldstein et al., 2009, for a comprehensive discussion of the assessment of developmental disorders.)  Autism Spectrum Disorder  One of the most disabling of the childhood disorders is autistic disorder, which is often referred to as autism, childhood autism (Schopler et al., 2001), or, in the   DSM-5 , autism spectrum dis- order. It is a developmental disorder that involves a wide range of problematic behaviors including deficits in language and perceptual and motor development; defective reality testing; and an inability  muscles when he answered questions in class. He had been unaware of this muscle twitch and, even after being told about it, could not tell when it took place. However, he became acutely self-conscious and was reluctant to answer questions or enter into class discussions. As a result, his general level of tension increased, and so did the frequency of the tic, which now became apparent even when he was talking to his friends. Thus a vicious circle had been established. Fortunately, the tic proved amenable to treatment by conditioning and assertiveness training.  Tourette’s disorder , classified as a motor disorder in  DSM-5 , is an extreme tic disorder involving multiple motor and vocal patterns. This disorder typically involves uncontrol- lable head movements with accompanying sounds such as grunts, clicks, yelps, sniffs, or words. Some, possibly most, tics are preceded by an urge or sensation that seems to be relieved by execution of the tic. Tics are thus often difficult to dif- ferentiate from compulsions, and they are sometimes referred to as “compulsive tics” (Jankovic, 1997). An epidemiological study in Sweden reported the prevalence of Tourette’s disorder in children and adolescents to be about 0.56 percent (Khalifa & von Knorring, 2004). About one-third of individuals with Tourette’s disorder manifest coprolalia, which is a complex vocal tic that involves the uttering of obscenities. Some people with Tourette’s disorder also experience explosive outbursts (Budman et al., 2000). The average age of onset for Tourette’s disorder is 7, and most cases have an onset before age 14. The disorder frequently persists into adulthood, and it is about three times more frequent among males than among females. Although the exact cause of Tourette’s disorder is undetermined, evidence sug- gests an organic basis (Margolis et al., 2006). There are many types of tics, and many of them appear to be associated with the presence of other psychological disorders (Cardona et al., 1997), particularly obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Most tics, however, do not have an organic basis but stem from psy- chological causes such as self-consciousness or tension in social situations, and they are usually associated with severe behavioral problems (Rosenberg et al., 1995). As in the case of the adoles- cent boy previously described, an individual’s awareness of the tic often increases tension and the occurrence of the tic. Among medications, neuroleptics are the most predictably effective tic-suppressing drugs (Kurlan, 1997). Clonazepam, clonidine, and tiapride have all shown effectiveness in reducing motor tics; however, tiapride has shown the greatest decrease in the intensity and frequency of tics (Drtikova et al., 1996). Campbell and Cueva (1995) reported that both haloperidol and pimozide reduced the severity of tics by about 65 percent but that haloperidol seemed the more effective of the two medica- tions. Gilbert and colleagues (2004) reported that risperidone outperformed pimozide in tic suppression. Most people suffering from tic disorders do not receive treatment for their symptoms (Cook & Blacher, 2007); however,
range between 30 and 60 people in 10,000 (Fombonne, 2005). A recent study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, 2013) reported that the rate of autism among children is about 1 in 50. This reported increase in autism in recent years is likely due to methodological differences between studies and changes in diagnostic practice and public and professional awareness in recent years rather than an increase in prevalence (Williams et al., 2005). Autism is usually identified before a child is 30 months of age and may be suspected in the early weeks of life. Diagnostic stability over the childhood years is quite high for autism. Lord and colleagues (2006) report that children diagnosed with autism by age 2 tend to be similarly diagnosed at age 9. One study found that autistic behav- ior such as lack of empathy, inattention to others, and inability to imitate is shown as early as 20 months (Charman et al., 1997).  THE ClINICAl PICTurE IN AuTISTIC SPECTrum DISorDEr  Children with autism show varying degrees of impairments and to function in social situations. The following case illustrates some of the behaviors that may be seen in a child with autism.  The Need for Routine   Mathew is 5 years old. When spoken to, he turns his head away. Sometimes he mumbles unin- telligibly. He is neither toilet trained nor able to feed himself. He actively resists being touched. He dislikes sounds and is uncom- municative. He cannot relate to others and avoids looking any- one in the eye. He often engages in routine manipulative activi- ties such as dropping an object, picking it up, and dropping it again. He shows a pathological need for sameness. While seated, he often rocks back and forth in a rhythmic motion for hours. Any change in routine is highly upsetting to him.  Autism in infancy and childhood was first described by Kanner (1943). It afflicts tens of thousands of American children from all socioeconomic levels and is seemingly on the increase—estimates  DSM- 5  criteria for  Autism Spectrum Disorder  A.   Persistent deficits in social communication and social interac- tion across multiple contexts, as manifested by the following, currently or by history (examples are illustrative, not exhaus- tive; see text):  1.   Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity, ranging, for exam- ple, from abnormal social approach and failure of normal back-and-forth conversation; to reduced sharing of inter- ests, emotions, or affect; to failure to initiate or respond to social interactions.  2.   Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction, ranging, for example, from poorly integrated verbal and nonverbal communication; to abnormalities in eye contact and body language or deficits in understanding and use of gestures; to a total lack of facial expressions and nonverbal communication.  3.   Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understand- ing relationships, ranging, for example, from difficulties adjusting behavior to suit various social contexts; to diffi- culties in sharing imaginative play or in making friends; to absence of interest in peers.  B.   Restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activi- ties, as manifested by at least two of the following, currently or by history (examples are illustrative, not exhaustive; see text):  1.   Stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or speech (e.g., simple motor stereotypies, lining up toys or flipping objects, echolalia, idiosyncratic phrases).  2.   Insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines, or ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal behavior (e.g., extreme distress at small changes, difficulties with transi- tions, rigid thinking patterns, greeting rituals, need to take same route or eat same food every day).  3.   Highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in intensity or focus (e.g., strong attachment to or preoccu- pation with unusual objects, excessively circumscribed or perseverative interests).  4.   Hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory input or unusual inter- est in sensory aspects of the environment (e.g., apparent indifference to pain/temperature, adverse response to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touching of objects, visual fascination with lights or movement).  C.   Symptoms must be present in the early developmental period (but may not become fully manifest until social demands exceed limited capacities, or may be masked by learned strat- egies in later life).  D.   Symptoms cause clinically significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of current functioning.  E.   These disturbances are not better explained by intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) or global developmental delay. Intellectual disability and autism spec- trum disorder frequently co-occur; to make comorbid diag- noses of autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability, social communication should be below that expected for gen- eral developmental level.  Note:   Individuals with a well-established DSM-IV diagnosis of autistic disorder, Asperger’s disorder, or pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified should be given the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. Individuals who have marked deficits in social communication, but whose symptoms do not otherwise meet criteria for autism spectrum disorder, should be evaluated for social (pragmatic) communication disorder.  Source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.
Self-Stimulation   Self-stimulation is often characteristic of children with autism. It usually takes the form of such repetitive movements as head banging, spinning, and rocking, which may continue by the hour. Other bizarre repetitive behaviors are typical. Children with autism seem to actively arrange the environ- ment on their own terms in an effort to exclude or limit variety and intervention from other people, preferring instead a limited and solitary routine. These children often show an active aversion to auditory stimuli, crying even at the sound of a parent’s voice. The pattern is not always consistent, however; children with autism may at one moment be severely agitated or panicked by a very soft sound and at another time be totally oblivious to a loud noise.  Intellectual Ability   Compared with the performance of other groups of children on cognitive or intellectual tasks, chil- dren with autism often show marked impairment. For example, children with autism are significantly impaired on memory tasks when compared with both normal children and children with intellectual disability. They show a particular deficit in representing mental states—that is, they appear to have deficits in social reasoning but can manipulate objects. Carpentieri and Morgan (1996) found that the cognitive impairment in children with autism is reflected in their greater impairment in adaptive behaviors than is seen in mentally retarded children without autism. Some children with autism are quite skilled at fitting objects together; thus their performance on puzzles or form boards may be average or above. Even in the manipulation of objects, how- ever, difficulty with meaning is apparent. For example, when pic- tures are to be arranged in an order that tells a story, children with autism show a marked deficiency in performance. Moreover, ado- lescents with autism, even those who are functioning well, have difficulty with symbolic tasks such as pantomime—in which they are asked to recall motor actions to imitate tasks (e.g., ironing) with imagined objects—in spite of the fact that they might per- form the task well with real objects (Hillman & Snyder, 2007).  maintaining Sameness   Many children with autism become preoccupied with and form strong attachments to unusual objects such as rocks, light switches, or keys. In some instances, the object is so large or bizarre that merely carrying it around interferes with other activities. When their preoccupa- tion with the object is disturbed—for example, by its removal or by attempts to substitute something in its place—or when any- thing familiar in the environment is altered even slightly, these children may have a violent temper tantrum or a crying spell that continues until the familiar situation is restored. Thus children with autism are often said to be “obsessed with the maintenance of sameness.”   Watch   the   Video   Xavier: Autism   on   MyPsychLab .  CAuSAl FACTorS IN AuTISm   The precise cause or causes of autism are unknown, although most investigators agree that a fundamental disturbance of the central nervous system is capabilities. In this section, we will discuss some of the behaviors that may be evident in autism. A cardinal and typical sign is that a child seems apart or aloof from others, even in the earliest stages of life (Hillman & Snyder, 2007). Mothers often remember such babies as never being cuddly, never reaching out when being picked up, never smiling or looking at them while being fed, and never appearing to notice the comings and goings of other people.  A Social Deficit   Typically, children with autism do not show any need for affection or contact with anyone, and they usually do not even seem to know or care who their parents are. Several studies, however, have questioned the traditional view that autistic children are emotionally flat. These studies (Capps et al., 1993) have shown that children with autism do express emotions and should not be considered as lacking emotional reactions (Jones et al., 2001). Instead, Sigman (1996) has charac- terized the seeming inability of children with autism to respond to others as a lack of social understanding—a deficit in the abil- ity to attend to social cues from others. The child with autism is thought to have a “mind blindness,” an inability to take the attitude of others or to “see” things as others do. For example, a child with autism appears limited in the ability to understand where another person is pointing. Additionally, children with autism show deficits in attention and in locating and orienting to sounds in their environment (Hillman & Snyder, 2007). The lack of social interaction among children with autism has been well described. A behavioral observation study by Lord and Magill-Evans (1995) noted that the youngsters with autism engaged in fewer social interactions than other children; however, this study also made the important observation that the children with autism did not play—particularly, did not show spontaneous play. In fact, much of the time, nothing was going on. Encopresis is common (Siegel, 2003) among children with autism. Radford and Anderson (2003) point out that relatively little of the clinical descriptive literature on children with autism addresses the problem of toilet training. They note that failing to cooperate in toilet training is a common problem and one that cre- ates added difficulty for parents of children with autism, and they provide practical advice and training guidelines for dealing with this problem behavior. In addition, a high prevalence of sleep problems has been reported for children with autism (Williams et al., 2004).  An Absence of Speech   Children with autism do not effectively learn by imitation (Smith & Bryson, 1994). This dysfunction might explain their characteristic absence or severely limited use of speech. If speech is present, it is almost never used to communicate except in the most rudimentary fashion, such as by saying “yes” in answer to a question or by the use of  echolalia —the parrot-like repetition of a few words. Whereas the echoing of parents’ verbal behavior is found to a small degree in normal children as they experiment with their ability to produce articulate speech, persistent echolalia is found in about 75 per- cent of autistic children (Prizant, 1983).
management of a case might involve the use of medications to lower the level of aggression (Fava, 1997). Although there are no sure-fire medications approved for this purpose, the drug clomipramine has had some beneficial effects (see the discussion by Erickson et al., 2007). However, no currently available med- ication reduces the symptoms of autism enough to encourage its general use. We will thus direct our attention to a variety of psy- chological procedures that have been more successful in treating children with autism.  Behavioral Treatment   Behavior therapy in an institu- tional setting has been used successfully in the elimination of self-injurious behavior, the mastery of the fundamentals of social behavior, and the development of some language skills (Charlop- Christie et al., 1998). The late Ivar Lovaas (1987), a pioneer in behavioral treatment of children with autism, reported highly positive results from a long-term experimental treatment pro- gram. The intervention developed by Lovaas and colleagues is very intensive and is usually conducted in the children’s homes rather than in a clinical setting. The children are usually immersed in a one-to-one teaching situation for most of their waking hours over several years. The intervention is based on both discrimination-training strategies (reinforcement) and con- tingent aversive techniques (punishment). The treatment plan typically enlists parents in the process and emphasizes teaching children to learn from and interact with “normal” peers in real- world situations. Of the treated children in the study by Lovaas and colleagues, 47 percent achieved normal intellectual function- ing, and another 40 percent attained the mildly retarded level. In comparison, only 2 percent of the untreated control children achieved normal functioning, and 45 percent attained mildly retarded functioning. These remarkable results did, however, require a considerable staffing effort, with well-qualified therapists working with each child at least 40 hours per week for 2 years. involved (Girgis et al., 2007; Volker & Lopata, 2008). Many investigators believe that autism begins with some type of inborn defect that impairs an infant’s perceptual-cognitive function- ing—the ability to process incoming stimuli and to relate to the world. Recent MRI research suggests that abnormalities in the brain anatomy may contribute to the brain metabolic differences and behavioral phenotype in autism (McAlonan et al., 2005). Whatever the physiological mechanisms or brain structures in- volved, evidence has accumulated that defective genes or damage from radiation or other conditions during prenatal development may play a significant role in the etiologic picture (Nicolson & Szatmari, 2003; Waterhouse & Fein, 1997). Evidence for a genetic contribution to autism comes from examining the risk for autism in the siblings of autistic children (Levy et al., 2009; Mazefsky et al., 2008). The best estimates are that in families with one child with autism there is a 3 to 5 percent risk of a sib- ling having autism as well. Although this figure may seem low in an absolute sense, it is in fact extremely high, given the frequency of autism in the population. The most extensive autism genet- ics research project recently reported that tiny, rare variations in genes increase the risk of autism spectrum disorder (Autism Genome Project, 2007). These results suggest that components of the brain’s glutamate neurotransmitter system are involved in autism. Thus, autism seemingly results from faulty wiring in the early stages of development. That is, glutamate increases neuro- nal activity and plays an important role in wiring the brain dur- ing early development. Smoller and colleagues (2013) recently conducted a study analyzing genetic factors in mental disorders in 33,332 cases and 27,888 controls of European ancestry. They concluded that five disorders: autism spectrum disorders, schizo- phrenia, ADHD, bipolar disorder, and recurrent major depres- sive disorder shared a genetic basis. Nevertheless, the exact mode of genetic transmission is not yet understood, but it seems likely that relatives may also show an increased risk for other cognitive and social deficits that are milder in form than true autism (Smalley, 1991).  TrEATmENTS AND ouTComES oF AuTISm   The treatment prognosis for autistic disorder is poor, and because of the sever- ity of their problems, those diagnosed with autism are often insufficiently treated (Moldin & Rubenstein, 2006). Moreover, because of the typically poor response to treatment, children with autism are often subjected to a range of fads and “novel” approaches that turn out to be equally ineffective.  medical Treatment   In the past, the use of medications to treat children with autism has not proved effective. The drugs most often used in the treatment of autism are antidepres- sants (21.7 percent), antipsychotic medication (16.8 percent), and stimulants (13.9 percent; Handen & Lubetsky, 2005); but the data on their effectiveness do not support their use unless a child’s behavior is unmanageable by other means (Sloman, 1991). If irritability and aggressiveness are present, the medical  Some studies show that intensive behavioral treatment of children with autism, requiring a significant investment of time and energy on the part of therapist and parents, can bring about improvement, particularly if this treatment continues at home rather than in an institution.
long-term results of autism treatments have been unfavorable. A great deal of attention has thus been given to high-functioning children with autism (children who meet the criteria for autism yet develop functional speech). One important factor limiting treatment success is the dif- ficulty that children with autism have in generalizing behavior outside the treatment context. Children with severe develop- mental disabilities do not transfer skills across situations very well. Consequently, learning behavior in one situation does not appear to help them meet challenges in others. In spite of a few remarkable cases of dramatic success, the overall prognosis for children with autism remains guarded. Less than one-fourth of the children who receive treatment attain even marginal adjustment in later life. Even with intensive, long- term care in a clinical facility, where gratifying improvements in specific behaviors may be brought about, children with autism are a long way from becoming normal. Some of the other impressive results with children with autism have also been obtained in projects that involve par- ents, with treatment in the home (Siegel, 2003). Treatment contracts with parents specify the desired behavior changes in their child and spell out the explicit techniques for bringing about these changes. Such “contracting” acknowledges the value of the parents as potential agents of change (Huynen et al., 1996). See Developments in Practice below for an exam- ple of the use of technology to improve autistic behavior.  The Effectiveness of Treatment   It is too early to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of newer treatment methods or the degree of improvement they actually accomplish, although reports of effective behavioral intervention in some areas, such as attention skills, have been noted (Martins & Harris, 2006). The prognosis for children with autism, particularly for children showing symptoms before the age of 2, is poor. Commonly, the  developments in pracTIce  Can Virtual Reality Video Games Improve Treatment of Children with Neurodevelopmental Disorders?  M any children and adolescents with learning disabilities or neurodevelopmental disorders, like other children today, are readily drawn to computer video games and will spend long hours at machines. The potential value of video media and virtual reality games at engaging and train- ing young people appears to be great. These approaches have shown considerable promise in interesting and motivating chil- dren who might have cognitive processing impairments (Ecalle et al., 2010). Even though many of these children have problems in social relationships, deficits in attention, and often volatile and disruptive behaviors they can readily become engrossed in the world of virtual reality (see informative discussion by Durkin, 2010). Recent projects in developmental psychology in Japan have incorporated the use of computer-based media technology for influencing young people, including those with disabilities, to learn and experience new ways of functioning (Shwalb et al., 2005). For example, Nakamura, Iwabuchi, and Sakai (2005) report an intervention using cell phone calls to promote a quali- tative change in communication behavior in a boy with autism. Although video games as a medium for teaching life skills are recognized as having potential for the development of effec- tive treatments (Cartreine et al., 2010), a successful treatment requires more than its value as entertainment or time consump- tion. It is not necessarily a productive goal for a child with autism to just sit and stare in front of a TV screen and watch the same program all day as often happens. The treatment benefit needs to be more carefully considered. Programs for treatment or education require specifically tailored strategies to obtain the most effective results. Machines can only perform as they are programmed to do. Thus appropriate behavioral change strate- gies need to be developed and studied for particular applica- tions. The effectiveness of behavior modification approaches using computer technology for children with developmental dis- orders has not been widely demonstrated or even explored for many problem areas. It takes considerable research and devel- opment, along with extensive programming skills, to address particular problems that can change behavior. At this time, the psychological knowledge and research base lingers behind the expanding developments in technical equipment. The video and virtual reality game phenomena that have attracted many young people’s interest have also prompted some unanswered questions. This approach to education and treatment has come under criticism and raised potential concerns over its use. For example, there is concern that this approach has a strong potential for “addiction” to virtual reality games that could potentially adversely influence a child’s devel- opment (Pies, 2009). Questions have also been raised about the need for further considerations as to possible ethical issues, involving such factors as identity, equity, and confidentiality, that face instructors and therapists who use online teaching or therapy (Anderson & Simpson, 2007). Although the available and acceptable use of computer-based learning methods show promise, there are professional issues and program research limitations that need to be more fully explored before the full potential of this methodology is reached.
Children with learning disorder are initially identified as such because of an apparent disparity between their expected academic achievement level and their actual academic perfor- mance in one or more school subjects such as math, spelling, writing, or reading. Typically, these children have overall IQs, family backgrounds, and exposure to cultural norms and symbols that are consistent with at least average achievement in school. They do not have obvious, crippling emotional problems, nor do they seem to be lacking in motivation, cooperativeness, or eagerness to please their teachers and parents—at least not at the outset of their formal education. Nevertheless, they fail, often abysmally and usually with a stubborn, puzzling persistence. The consequences of these encounters between children with learning disabilities and rigid school systems can be disas- trous to these children’s self-esteem and general psychological well-being, and research indicates that these effects do not neces- sarily dissipate after secondary schooling ends but impact their career adjustment (Morris & Turnbull, 2007). Thus even when learning disorder difficulties are no longer a significant impedi- ment, an individual may bear, into maturity and beyond, the scars of many painful school-related episodes of failure. But there is also a brighter side to this picture. High levels of general talent and of motivation to overcome the obstacle of a learning disorder sometimes produce a life of extraordinary Parenting children with autism can be trying and stress- ful (Dunn et al., 2001) and can be very financially stressful for families. Parents of children with autism often find themselves in the extremely frustrating situation of trying to understand their child, providing day-to-day care, and searching for possible educational resources for their child in the present health and educational environment. An informative book on the topic of autism is   The World of the Autistic Child   (Siegel, 1996, 2007). Siegel discusses the impact that having a child with autism can have on the family—both parents and siblings—and describes ways of dealing with the problems that can arise, including the possible need of psychological treatment for other family members. The book is a particularly valuable guide to accessing the resources available for educating and treating children with autism and negotiating the confusing educational environment. Whether to seek residential placement, clearly a necessity in some situations and families, is also an important decision that parents of many children with autism must address.  in review  What is known about the causes and treatments of autistic disorder?  Specific Learning Disorders  The inadequate development found in   learning disorders , a term that refers to delayed development, may be manifested in language, speech, mathematical, or motor skills, and it is not nec- essarily due to any demonstrable physical or neurological defect. Of these types of problems, the best known and most widely researched are a variety of reading/writing difficulties known col- lectively as   dyslexia . In dyslexia, the individual manifests prob- lems in word recognition and reading comprehension; often he or she is markedly deficient in spelling and memory (Smith-Spark & Fisk, 2007) as well. On assessments of reading skill, these persons routinely omit, add, and distort words, and their reading is typi- cally painfully slow. The diagnosis of learning disorders is restricted to those cases in which there is clear impairment in school performance or (if the person is not a student) in daily living activities— impairment not due to intellectual disability or to a pervasive developmental disorder such as autism. Skill deficits due to attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder are coded under that diagnosis. This coding presents another diagnostic dilemma, however, because some investigators hold that an attention deficit is basic to many learning disorders; evidence for the lat- ter view is equivocal (see Faraone et al., 1993). Children (and adults) with these disorders are more generally said to be learn- ing disordered. Significantly more boys than girls are diag- nosed as learning disabled, but estimates of the extent of this gender discrepancy have varied widely from study to study. Prevalence estimates have shown that approximately 1 in 59, or 4.6 million people, in the United States (National Institutes of Mental Health, 2007) are learning disabled.  Children with learning disorders can experience deep emotional tension under normal learning circumstances.
Some investigators believe that the various forms of learning disorder, or the vulnerability to develop them, may be genetically transmitted. This issue seems not to have been studied with the same intensity or methodological rigor as in other disorders, but identification of a gene region for dyslexia on chromosome 6 has been reported (Schulte-Koerne, 2001). Although it would be somewhat surprising if a single gene were identified as the causal factor in all cases of reading disorder, the hypothesis of a genetic contribution to at least the dyslexic form of learning disorder seems promising. One twin study of mathematics disability has also turned up evidence of some genetic contribution to this form of learning disorder (Alarcon et al., 1997).  Treatments and outcomes  Because we do not yet have a confident grasp of what is “wrong” with the average learning disordered child, it is important to have a clear assessment of their problems and abilities (Mapou, 2009) so that successful treatment can be implemented. We have had limited success in treating many of these children. Many informal and single-case reports claim success with various treat- ment approaches, but direct instruction strategies often do not succeed in transforming these children’s abilities (Gettinger & Koscik, 2001), and there are few well-designed and well-executed outcome studies on specific treatments for learning disorders. We have only limited data on the long-term, adult adjust- ments of people who grew up with the personal, academic, and social problems that learning disorder generally entails. Two achievement. Sir Winston Churchill, British statesman, author, and inspiring World War II leader, is said to have been dyslexic as a child. The same attribution is made to Woodrow Wilson, former university professor and president of the United States, and to Nelson Rockefeller, former governor of New York and vice president of the United States. Such examples remind us that the “bad luck” and personal adversity of having a learning disorder need not be uniformly limiting; quite the contrary.  Causal Factors in learning Disorder  Probably the most widely held view of the causes of specific learning disorders is that they are the products of subtle central nervous system impairments. In particular, these disabilities are thought to result from some sort of immaturity, deficiency, or dysregulation limited to those brain functions that supposedly mediate, for normal children, the cognitive skills that learning disorder children cannot efficiently acquire. For example, many researchers believe that language-related learning disorders such as dyslexia are associated with a failure of the brain to develop in a normally asymmetrical manner with respect to the right and left hemispheres. Specifically, portions of the left hemisphere, where language function is normally mediated, for unknown reasons appear to remain relatively underdeveloped in many dys- lexic individuals (Beaton, 1997). Recent work with functional magnetic resonance imaging (see Chapter 4) has suggested that dyslexic individuals have a deficiency of physiological activation in the cerebellum (Richards et al., 2005).  A long with the addition of new diagnostic categories, such as gambling disorder and hoarding disorder, and the revision of other earlier diagnostic criteria resulting in disorders such as disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, there have been changes to some existing categories that are largely nominal in order to make the terminology more appro- priate with contemporary language use and/or consistent with forthcoming   International Classification of Diseases system (ICD- 11)   to be published in 2015. Several reasons are provided for renaming of some diagnostic categories. For example, the term mental retardation was used in describing individuals with intellectual impairment in previous editions of the   DSM . However, the term “Mental Retardation” has come to be unacceptable in contemporary use and is considered to be derogatory by many. The new term, “intellectual disability” to replace the term mental retar- dation has come into more common use in the last decades by professionals, by the lay public and various advocacy groups. As noted by the   DSM-5   committee, a U.S. legal statue (Public Law 111-256 or Rosa’s Law) has replaced the term mental retardation with intellectual disability. At the Second Session of the 111 Congress of the United States in 2010 the following resolution was passed: (b) INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES EDUCATION ACT— (1) SECTION 601(c) (12)(C) of the Individuals with Disabili- ties Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1400(c) (12)(C) is amended by striking “having mental retardation” and inserting “having intellectual disabilities.” Although, some practitioners (being accustomed to prior terminol- ogy) may have “translation” difficulties as they proceed with new language in   DSM-5   the behaviors and symptoms that make up the problem areas being described are essentially familiar ones.  ThInkIng crITIcally about DsM-5  Changes to the Diagnostic System are Nominal for Some Disorders   DSM- 5
with only a mild degree of intellectual impairment, who consti- tute the vast majority of the mentally retarded, often appear to be normal. Their subaverage intellectual functioning becomes apparent only when difficulties with schoolwork lead to a diag- nostic evaluation. When adequate facilities are available for their education, children in this group can usually master essential school skills and achieve a satisfactory level of socially adaptive behavior. Following the school years, they usually make a more or less acceptable adjustment in the community and thus lose the identity of being mentally retarded.  levels of Intellectual Disability  The various levels of intellectual disability are described in greater detail in the following sections.  mIlD INTEllECTuAl DISABIlITY   Individuals with mild in- tellectual disability constitute by far the largest number of those diagnosed with intellectual disability Within the educational context, people in this group are considered educable, and their intellectual levels as adults are comparable to those of average 8- to 11-year-old children. Statements such as the latter, however, should not be taken too literally. An adult with mild disability with a mental age of, say, 10 (that is, his or her intelligence test performance is at the level of the average 10-year-old) may not in fact be comparable to the average 10-year-old in information-pro- cessing ability or speed (Weiss et al., 1986). On the other hand, he or she will normally have had far more experience in living, which would tend to raise the measured intelligence scores. The social adjustment of people with mild intellectual dis- ability often approximates that of adolescents, although they tend to lack normal adolescents’ imagination, inventiveness, and judgment. Ordinarily, they do not show signs of brain pathology or other physical anomalies, but often they require some mea- sure of supervision because of their limited abilities to foresee studies of college students with learning disorder (Gregg & Hoy, 1989) suggest that as a group they continue to have problems— academic, personal, and social—into the postsecondary education years. In a community survey of learning disorder adults, Khan, Cowan, and Roy, (1997) found that some 50 percent of them had personality abnormalities. Cato and Rice (1982) extracted from the available literature a lengthy list of problems experienced by the typical learning disorder adult. These include—in addition to expected difficulties with self- confidence—continuing problems with deficits in the ordinary skills such as math that these people had trouble with as chil- dren. The authors do note, however, that there are considerable individual differences in these outcomes and that some adults with learning disorder are able to manage very well.  Intellectual Disability  Intellectual disability   (intellectual developmental disorder) is characterized by deficits in general mental abilities, such as reasoning, problem solving, planning, abstract-thinking, judgment, academic learning, and learning from experience (APA 2013, p. 31). For the diagnosis to apply, these problems must begin before the age of 18. Intellectual disability is thus defined in terms of level of performance as well as intelligence. The definition says nothing about causal factors, which may be primarily biological, psychosocial, sociocultural, or a combina- tion of these. By definition, any functional equivalent of Intellec- tual disability that has its onset after age 17 must be considered a dementia rather than intellectual disability. The distinction is an important one because the psychological situation of a person who acquires a pronounced impairment of intellectual function- ing after attaining maturity is vastly different from that of a per- son whose intellectual resources were below normal throughout all or most of his or her development. Intellectual disability occurs among children throughout the world (Fryers, 2000). In its most severe forms, it is a source of great hardship to parents as well as an economic and social burden on a community. The point prevalence rate of diagnosed intellectual dis- ability in the United States is estimated to be about 1 percent, which would indicate a population estimate of some 2.6 million people. In fact, however, prevalence is extremely difficult to pin down because definitions of intellectual disability vary considerably (Roeleveld et al., 1997). Most states have laws providing that persons with IQs below 70 who show socially incompetent or persistently problematic behavior can be classified as “mentally retarded” and, if judged oth- erwise unmanageable, may be placed in an institution. Informally, IQ scores between about 70 and 90 are often referred to as “border- line” or (in the upper part of the range) as “dull-normal.” Initial diagnoses of intellectual disability occur very fre- quently at ages 5 to 6 (around the time that schooling begins for most children), peak at age 15, and drop off sharply after that. For the most part, these patterns in age of first diagnosis reflect changes in life demands. During early childhood, individuals  Individuals with mild intellectual disability constitute the largest number of those categorized as mentally retarded. With help, a great majority of these individuals can adjust socially, master simple academic and occupa- tional skills, and become self-supporting citizens.
individuals must remain in custodial care all their lives. They tend, however, to have poor health and low resistance to disease and thus a short life expectancy. Severe and profound cases of intellectual disability can usually be readily diagnosed in in- fancy because of the presence of obvious physical malformations, grossly delayed development (e.g., in taking solid food), and other obvious symptoms of abnormality. These individuals show a marked impairment of overall intellectual functioning.  Causal Factors in Intellectual Disability  Some cases of intellectual disability occur in association with known organic brain pathology (Kaski, 2000). In these cases, retardation is virtually always at least moderate, and it is often severe. Profound retardation, which fortunately is rare, always includes obvious organic impairment. Organically caused retar- dation is, in essential respects, similar to dementia, except for the different history of prior functioning. In this section, we will consider five biological conditions that may lead to intellectual disability, noting some of the possible interrelationships among them. Then we will review some of the major clinical types of intellectual disability associated with these organic causes.  GENETIC-CHromoSomAl FACTorS   Intellectual disability, especially mild disability, tends to run in families. Poverty and sociocultural deprivation, however, also tend to run in families, and with early and continued exposure to such conditions, even the inheritance of average intellectual potential may not prevent subaverage intellectual functioning. Genetic-chromosomal factors play a much clearer role in the etiology of relatively infrequent but more severe types of intel- lectual disability such as Down syndrome and a heritable condi- tion known as fragile X (Huber & Tamminga, 2007; Schwarte, 2008). The gene responsible for fragile X syndrome (FMR-1) was identified in 1991 (Verkerk et al., 1991). In such conditions, genetic aberrations are responsible for metabolic alterations that adversely affect the brain’s development. Genetic defects lead- ing to metabolic alterations may, of course, involve many other developmental anomalies besides intellectual disability —for example, autism (Wassink et al., 2001). In general, intellectual disability associated with known genetic-chromosomal defects is moderate to severe.  INFECTIoNS AND ToxIC AGENTS   Intellectual disability may be associated with a wide range of conditions due to infection such as viral encephalitis or genital herpes (Kaski, 2000). If a pregnant woman is infected with syphilis or HIV-1 or if she gets German measles, her child may suffer brain damage. A number of toxic agents such as carbon monoxide and lead may cause brain damage during fetal development or after birth (Kaski, 2000). In rare instances, immunological agents such as antitetanus serum or typhoid vaccine may lead to brain damage. Similarly, if taken by a pregnant woman, certain drugs, including an excess of alcohol (West et al., 1998), may lead to the consequences of their actions. With early diagnosis, parental assistance, and special educational programs, the great majority of borderline and individuals with mild intellectual disability can adjust socially, master simple academic and occupational skills, and become self-supporting citizens (Maclean, 1997).  moDErATE INTEllECTuAl DISABIlITY   Individuals with moderate intellectual disability are likely to fall in the educa- tional category of trainable, which means that they are presumed able to master certain routine skills such as cooking or minor janitorial work if provided specialized instruction in these activi- ties. In adult life, individuals with moderate intellectual disability attain intellectual levels similar to those of average 4- to 7-year- old children. Although some can be taught to read and write a little and may manage to achieve a fair command of spoken language, their rate of learning is slow, and their level of con- ceptualizing is extremely limited. They usually appear clumsy and ungainly, and they suffer from bodily deformities and poor motor coordination. Some individuals with moderate intellectual disability are hostile and aggressive; more typically, they are affa- ble and nonthreatening. In general, with early diagnosis, parental help, and adequate opportunities for training, most individuals with moderate intellectual disability can achieve partial indepen- dence in daily self-care, acceptable behavior, and economic suste- nance in a family or other sheltered environment.  SEVErE INTEllECTuAl DISABIlITY   In individuals with se- vere intellectual disability, motor and speech development are severely retarded and sensory defects and motor handicaps are common. They can develop limited levels of personal hygiene and self-help skills, which somewhat lessen their dependency, but they are always dependent on others for care. However, many profit to some extent from training and can perform sim- ple occupational tasks under supervision.  ProFouND INTEllECTuAl DISABIlITY   Most individuals with profound intellectual disability are severely deficient in adaptive behavior and unable to master any but the simplest tasks. Useful speech, if it develops at all, is rudimentary. Severe physical deformities, central nervous system pathology, and retarded growth are typical; convulsive seizures, mutism, deaf- ness, and other physical anomalies are also common. These  table   15.1  Disability Severity and IQ ranges Diagnosed level of Intellectual disability   Corresponding IQ range  Mild disability   50–55 to approximately 70 Moderate disability   35–40 to 50–55 Severe disability   20–25 to 35–40 Profound disability   below 20–25
mAlNuTrITIoN AND oTHEr BIoloGICAl FACTorS   It was long thought that dietary deficiencies in protein and other essential nutrients during early development of the fetus could do irreversible physical and mental damage. However, it is currently believed that this assumption of a direct causal link may have been oversimplified. Ricciuti (1993) cited growing evidence that malnutrition may affect mental development more indirectly by altering a child’s responsiveness, curiosity, and motivation to learn. According to this hypothesis, these losses would then lead to a relative retardation of intellectual facility. The implication here is that at least some malnutrition- associated intellectual deficit is a special case of psychosocial deprivation, which is also involved in retardation outcomes, as described below. A limited number of cases of intellectual disability are clearly associated with organic brain pathology. In some instances—par- ticularly of the severe and profound types—the specific causes are uncertain or unknown, although extensive brain pathology is evident.  organic retardation Syndromes  Intellectual disability stemming primarily from biological causes can be classified into several recognizable clinical types (Murphy et al., 1998), of which Down syndrome, phenylketonuria (PKU), and cranial anomalies will be discussed here. Table 15.2 presents information on several other well-known forms.  DowN SYNDromE   First described by Langdon Down in 1866,  Down syndrome   is the best known of the clinical conditions congenital malformations. And an overdose of drugs adminis- tered to an infant may result in toxicity and cause brain dam- age. In rare cases, brain damage results from incompatibility in blood types between mother and fetus. Fortunately, early diag- nosis and blood transfusions can minimize the effects of such incompatibility.  TrAumA (PHYSICAl INjurY)   Physical injury at birth can re- sult in intellectual disability (Kaski, 2000). Although the fetus is normally well protected by its fluid-filled placenta during gesta- tion, and although its skull resists delivery stressors, accidents do happen during delivery and after birth. Difficulties in labor due to malposition of the fetus or other complications may irreparably damage the infant’s brain. Bleeding within the brain is probably the most common result of such birth trauma. Hypoxia—lack of sufficient oxygen to the brain stemming from delayed breathing or other causes—is another type of birth trauma that may damage the brain.  IoNIzING rADIATIoN   In recent decades, a good deal of sci- entific attention has been focused on the damaging effects of ionizing radiation on sex cells and other bodily cells and tissues. Radiation may act directly on the fertilized ovum or may pro- duce gene mutations in the sex cells of either or both parents, which may lead to defective offspring. Sources of harmful ra- diation were once limited primarily to high-energy X rays used in medicine for diagnosis and therapy, but the list has grown to include nuclear weapons testing and leakages at nuclear power plants, among others.  table   15.2  other Disorders Sometimes Associated with Intellectual Disability Clinical Type   Symptoms   Causes No. 18 trisomy syndrome   Peculiar pattern of multiple congenital anomalies, the most common being low-set malformed ears, flexion of fingers, small jaw, and heart defects Autosomal anomaly of chromosome 18  Tay-Sachs disease   Hypertonicity, listlessness, blindness, progressive spastic paralysis, and convulsions (death by the third year) Disorder of lipoid metabolism, carried by a single reces- sive gene  Turner’s syndrome   In females only; webbing of neck, increased carrying angle of forearm, and sexual infantilism; intellectual dis- ability may occur but is infrequent Sex chromosome anomaly (XO)  Klinefelter’s syndrome   In males only; features vary from case to case, the only constant finding being the presence of small testes after puberty Sex chromosome anomaly (XXY)  Niemann-Pick’s disease   Onset usually in infancy, with loss of weight, dehydra- tion, and progressive paralysis Disorder of lipoid metabolism  Bilirubin encephalopathy   Abnormal levels of bilirubin (a toxic substance released by red cell destruction) in the blood; motor incoordina- tion frequent Often, Rh (ABO) blood group incompatibility between mother and fetus  rubella, congenital   Visual difficulties most common, with cataracts and reti- nal problems often occurring together, and with deaf- ness and anomalies in the valves and septa of the heart The mother’s contraction of rubella (German measles) during the first few months of her pregnancy Source: Based on American Psychiatric Association (2013); Harris (2006).
The fingers are stubby, and the little finger is often more notice- ably curved than the other fingers. Although facial surgery is sometimes tried to correct the more stigmatizing features, its suc- cess is often limited (Roizen, 2007). Also, parents’ acceptance of their Down syndrome child is inversely related to their support of such surgery (Katz et al., 1997). There are special medical problems with Down syndrome children that require careful medical attention and examinations (Tyrer et al., 2007). Death rates for children with Down syn- drome have, however, decreased dramatically in the past century. In 1919 the life expectancy at birth for such children was about 9 years; most of the deaths were due to gross physical problems, and a large proportion occurred in the first year of life. Thanks to antibiotics, surgical correction of lethal anatomical defects such as holes in the walls separating the heart’s chambers, and better general medical care, many more of these children now live to adulthood (Hijii et al., 1997). Nevertheless, they appear as a group to experience an accelerated aging process (Hasegawa et al., 1997) and a decline in cognitive abilities (Thompson, 2003). One recent study reported that of those with Down syn- drome who were age 60 and above, a little more than 50 percent had clinical evidence of dementia (Margallo et al., 2007). Despite their problems, children with Down syndrome are usually able to learn self-help skills, acceptable social behavior, associated with moderate and severe intellectual disability. The prevalence of Down syndrome has been reported to be 5.9 per 10,000 of the general population (Cooper, Smiley, et al., 2009). It is a condition that creates irreversible limitations on survivability, intellectual achievement, and competence in managing life tasks (Bittles et al., 2007; Patterson & Lott, 2008) and is associated with health problems in later life such as pneumonia and other respi- ratory infections. The availability of amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling in expectant mothers has made it possible to detect in utero the extra genetic material involved in Down syndrome, which is most often the trisomy of chromosome 21, yielding 47 rather than the normal 46 chromosomes (see Figure 15.1).  The Clinical Picture in Down Syndrome   A number of physical features are often found among children with Down syndrome, but few of these children have all of the character- istics commonly thought to typify this group. The eyes appear almond-shaped, and the skin of the eyelids tends to be abnor- mally thick. The face and nose are often flat and broad, as is the back of the head. The tongue, which seems too large for the mouth, may show deep fissures. The iris of the eye is frequently speckled. The neck is often short and broad, as are the hands.  Physical features found among children with Down syndrome include almond-shaped eyes, abnormally thick skin on the eyelids, and a face and nose that are often flat and broad. The tongue may seem too big for the mouth and may show deep fissures. The iris of the eye is frequently speckled. The neck is often short and broad, as are the hands. The fin- gers are stubby, and the little finger is often more noticeably curved than the other fingers.  figure   15.1  Trisomy of Chromosome 21 in Down Syndrome   This is a reproduction (karyotype) of the chromosomes of a female patient with Down syn- drome. Note the triple (rather than the normal paired) representation at chromosome 21.  Source: Reproduced with permission by Custom Medical Stock Photo, Inc.
The reason for the trisomy of chromosome 21 is not clear, and research continues to address the potential causes (Korbel et al., 2009), but the defect seems definitely related to cogni- tive deficit (Kahlem, 2006) and to parental age at conception. It has been known for many years that the incidence of Down syndrome increases on an accelerating slope (from the 20s on) with increasing age of the mother. A woman in her 20s has about 1 chance in 2,000 of conceiving a Down syndrome baby, whereas the risk for a woman in her 40s is 1 in 50 (Holvey & Talbott, 1972). As in the case of all birth defects, the risk of hav- ing a Down syndrome baby is also high for very young mothers, whose reproductive systems have not yet fully matured. Research has also indicated that the father’s age at conception is impli- cated in Down syndrome, particularly at higher ages (Stene et al., 1981). Thus it seems that advancing age in either parent increases the risk of the trisomy 21 anomaly, although the effect of mater- nal age is greater. It is not yet clear how aging produces this effect. A reasonable guess is that aging is related to cumulative exposure to varied environmental hazards such as radiation that might have adverse effects on the processes involved in zygote formation or development.  PHENYlKEToNurIA   In   phenylketonuria (PKU) , a baby appears normal at birth but lacks a liver enzyme needed to break down phenylalanine, an amino acid found in many foods. The genetic error results in intellectual disability only when significant quantities of phenylalanine are ingested, which is virtually certain to occur if the child’s condition remains undiagnosed (Grodin & Laurie, 2000). This dis- order occurs in about 1 in 12,000 births (Deb & Ahmed, 2000). This condition is reversible (Embury et al., 2007); however, if the condition is not detected and treated, the amount of phenylalanine in the blood increases and eventu- ally produces brain damage. The disorder usually becomes apparent between 6 and 12 months after birth, although such symptoms as vomiting, a peculiar odor, infantile eczema, and seizures may occur during the early weeks of life. Often, the first symptoms noticed are signs of intellectual disability, which may be moderate to severe, depending on the degree to which the disease has progressed. Lack of motor coordination and other neurological problems caused by the brain damage are also common, and often the eyes, skin, and hair of untreated PKU patients are very pale (Dyer, 1999). The early detection of PKU by examining urine for the pres- ence of phenylpyruvic acid is routine in developed countries, and dietary treatment (such as the elimination of phenylalanine- containing foods such as diet soda or turkey) and related proce- dures can be used to prevent the disorder (Sullivan & Chang, 1999). With early detection and treatment—preferably before an infant is 6 months old—the deterioration process can usually be arrested so that levels of intellectual functioning may range and routine manual skills that enable them to be of assistance in a family or institutional setting (Brown et al., 2001). The traditional view has been that children with Down syndrome are unusually placid and affectionate. However, research has called into question the validity of this generalization (Pary, 2004). These children may indeed be very docile, but probably in no greater proportion than normal children; they may also be equally (or more) difficult in various areas. In general, the qual- ity of a child’s social relationships depends on both IQ level and a supportive home environment (Alderson, 2001). Adults with Down syndrome may manifest less maladaptive behavior than comparable persons with other types of learning disabilities (Collacott et al., 1998). Research has also suggested that the intellectual defect in Down syndrome may not be consistent across various abili- ties. Children with Down syndrome tend to remain relatively unimpaired in their appreciation of spatial relationships and in visual-motor coordination, although some evidence disputes this conclusion (Uecker et al., 1993). Research data are quite consistent in showing that their greatest deficits are in verbal and language-related skills (Azari et al., 1994; Silverstein et al., 1982). Because spatial functions are known to be partially local- ized in the right cerebral hemisphere, and language-related func- tions localized in the left cerebral hemisphere, some investigators speculate that the syndrome is especially crippling to the left hemisphere. Chromosomal abnormalities other than the trisomy of chromosome 21 may occasionally be involved in the etiology of Down syndrome. However, the extra version of chromosome 21 is present in at least 94 percent of cases. As we noted earlier, it may be significant that this is the same chromosome that has been implicated in research on Alzheimer’s disease, especially given that persons with Down syndrome are at extremely high risk for Alzheimer’s as they get into and beyond their late 30s (Prasher & Kirshnan, 1993).  Today many more Down syndrome children are living to adulthood than in the past and are able to learn self-help, social, and manual skills. It is not unusual for Down syndrome children to be mainstreamed to some extent with unimpaired children, such as this boy (center, with glasses). Children with Down syndrome tend to remain relatively unimpaired in their appreciation of spatial relationships and visual-motor coordination; they show their greatest deficits in verbal and language-related skills.
genetic factors is not clear, although there is speculation that a single recessive gene is involved in a primary, inherited form of the disorder (Robinson & Robinson, 1976). Treatment is inef- fective once faulty development has occurred; at present, preven- tive measures focus on the avoidance of infection and radiation during pregnancy.  Hydrocephaly   The condition referred to as   hydrocephaly  is a relatively rare disorder in which the accumulation of an abnormal amount of cerebrospinal fluid within the cranium causes damage to the brain tissues and enlargement of the skull (Materro et al., 2001). In congenital cases, the head either is already enlarged at birth or begins to enlarge soon thereafter, presumably as a result of a disturbance in the formation, absorp- tion, or circulation of the cerebrospinal fluid. The disorder can also arise in infancy or early childhood following the develop- ment of a brain tumor, subdural hematoma, meningitis, or other conditions. In these cases, the condition appears to result from a blockage of the cerebrospinal pathways and an accumulation of fluid in certain brain areas. The clinical picture in hydrocephaly depends on the extent of neural damage, which in turn depends on the age at onset and the duration and severity of the disorder. In chronic cases, the chief symptom is the gradual enlargement of the upper part of the head out of proportion to the face and the rest of the body. While the expansion of the skull helps minimize destructive pressure on the brain, serious brain damage occurs nonetheless. This damage leads to intellectual impairment and to such other effects as convulsions and impairment or loss of sight and hear- ing. The degree of intellectual impairment varies, being severe or profound in advanced cases. Hydrocephaly can be treated by a procedure in which shunt- ing devices are inserted to drain cerebrospinal fluid. With early diagnosis and treatment, this condition can usually be arrested before severe brain damage has occurred (Duinkerke et al., 2004). Even with significant brain damage, carefully planned and early interventions that take into account both strengths and weaknesses in intellectual functioning may minimize disability (Baron & Goldberger, 1993).  Treatments, outcomes, and Prevention  A number of programs have demonstrated that significant changes in the adaptive capacity of children with intellectual dis- ability are possible through special education and other rehabili- tative measures (Berney, 2000). The degree of change that can be expected is related, of course, to the individual’s particular situa- tion and level of intellectual disability.  TrEATmENT FACIlITIES AND mETHoDS   Parents of children with intellectual disability often find that childrearing is a very difficult challenge (Glidden & Schoolcraft, 2007). For example, recent research has shown that learning disability is associated with a higher incidence of mental health problems (Cooper & from borderline to normal. A few children suffer intellectual dis- ability despite restricted phenylalanine intake and other preven- tive efforts, however. Dietary restriction in late-diagnosed PKU may improve the clinical picture somewhat, but there is no real substitute for early detection and prompt intervention (Pavone et al., 1993). It appears that for a baby to inherit PKU, both parents must carry the recessive gene. Thus, when one child in a family is dis- covered to have PKU, it is especially critical that other children in the family be screened as well. Also, a pregnant PKU mother whose risk status has been successfully addressed by early dietary intervention may damage her at-risk fetus unless she maintains rigorous control of phenylalanine intake. Patients with PKU are typically advised to follow a restricted diet over their life span in order to prevent cognitive impairment. Some investigators have reported mild deficits in cognitive func- tioning even with long-term treatment (White et al., 2002). However, other research has found little support for the hypothesis that deficits will occur even with dietary restrictions (Channon et al., 2004).  CrANIAl ANomAlIES   Intellectual disability is associated with a number of conditions that involve alterations in head size and shape and for which the causal factors have not been definitely established (Carr et al., 2007). In the rare condition known as  macrocephaly   (large-headedness), for example, there is an in- crease in the size and weight of the brain, an enlargement of the skull, visual impairment, convulsions, and other neurological symptoms resulting from the abnormal growth of glial cells that form the supporting structure for brain tissue.  microcephaly   The term   microcephaly   means “small- headedness.” This condition is associated with a type of intellec- tual disability resulting from impaired development of the brain and a consequent failure of the cranium to attain normal size. The most obvious characteristic of microcephaly is a small head, the circumference of which rarely exceeds 17 inches, com- pared with the normal size of approximately 22 inches. Penrose (1963) also describes children with microcephaly as being invari- ably short in stature but having relatively normal musculature and sex organs. Beyond these characteristics, they differ consid- erably from one another in appearance, although there is a ten- dency for the skull to be cone-shaped, with a receding chin and forehead. Children with microcephaly fall within the moderate, severe, and profound categories of intellectual disability but most show little language development and are extremely limited in mental capacity. Microcephaly may result from a wide range of factors that impair brain development, including intrauterine infections and pelvic irradiation during the mother’s early months of preg- nancy. Miller (1970) noted a number of cases of microcephaly in Hiroshima and Nagasaki that apparently resulted from the atomic bomb explosions during World War II. The role of
Today, there are approximately 129,000 people with intel- lectual disability and other related conditions who receive intermediate care although many are not institutionalized. This is considerably less than the number of residents in treatment 40 years ago. These developments reflect both the new opti- mism that has come to prevail and, in many instances, new laws and judicial decisions upholding the rights of retarded people and their families. A notable example is Public Law 94–142, passed by Congress in 1975 and since modified several times (see Hayden, 1998). This statute, termed the Education for All Handicapped Children Act, asserts the right of intellectually dis- abled people to be educated at public expense in the least restric- tive environment possible. During the 1970s, there was a rapid increase in alternative forms of care for individuals with intellectual disability (Tyor & Bell, 1984). These included the use of decentralized regional facilities for short-term evaluation and training, small private hospitals specializing in rehabilitative techniques, group homes or halfway houses integrated into the local community, nursing homes for the elderly with intellectual disability, the placement of children with severe intellectual disability in more enriched foster-home environments, varied forms of support to the family for own-home care, and employment services (Conley, 2003). The past 25 years have seen a marked enhancement in alterna- tive modes of life for individuals with intellectual disability, ren- dering obsolete (and often leading to the closing of ) many public institutions formerly devoted exclusively to this type of care.  EDuCATIoN AND INCluSIoN ProGrAmmING   Typi- cally, educational and training procedures involve mapping out target areas of improvement such as personal grooming, social behavior, basic academic skills, and (for retarded adults) simple occupational skills (see Shif, 2006). Within each area, specific skills are divided into simple components that can be learned and reinforced before more complex behaviors are required. Behavior modification that builds on a step-by-step progression can bring retarded individuals repeated experiences of success and lead to substantial progress even in severely impaired individuals (Mash & Barkley, 2006). For children with mild intellectual disability, the question of what schooling is best is likely to challenge both parents and school officials. Many such children fare better when they attend regular classes for much of the day. Of course, this type of approach—often called   mainstreaming   or “inclusion programming”—requires careful planning, a high level of teacher skill, and facilitative teacher attitudes (Wehman, 2003).  in review  •   Compare and contrast mild, moderate, severe, and profound intellectual disability.  •   Describe five biological conditions that may lead to intellectual disability.  van der Speck, 2009). One decision that the parents of a intellec- tual disabled child must make is whether to place the child in an institution (Gath, 2000). Most authorities agree that this should be considered as a last resort, in light of the unfavorable out- comes normally experienced—particularly in regard to the ero- sion of self-care skills (Lynch et al., 1997). In general, children who are institutionalized fall into two groups: (1) those who, in infancy and childhood, manifest severe intellectual disability and associated physical impairment and who enter an institution at an early age; and (2) those who have no physical impairments but show relatively mild intellectual disability and a failure to adjust socially in adolescence, eventually being institutionalized chiefly because of delinquency or other problem behavior (see Stattin & Klackenberg-Larsson, 1993). In these cases, social in- competence is the main factor in the decision. The families of patients in the first group come from all socioeconomic levels, whereas a significantly higher percentage of the families of those in the second group come from lower educational and occupa- tional strata. Long-term institutional care is linked with behavioral and emotional problems (Yang et al., 2007). The effect of being institutionalized in adolescence depends heavily on the institu- tion’s facilities as well as on individual factors because great care must be taken in assessing the residents’ needs and in the recruitment of staff personnel (Petronko et al., 1994). For the many teenagers with intellectual disability whose families are not in a position to help them achieve a satisfactory adjustment, community-oriented residential care seems a particularly effec- tive alternative (Alexander et al., 1985). Unfortunately, many neighborhoods resist the location of such facilities within their confines and reject integration of residents into the local society (Short & Johnston, 1997). For individuals with intellectual disability who do not require institutionalization, educational and training facilities have historically been woefully inadequate. It still appears that a very substantial proportion of individuals with intellectual dis- ability in the United States never get access to services appropri- ate to their specific needs (Luckasson et al., 1992). This neglect is especially tragic in view of the ways that exist to help these people. For example, classes for individuals with mild intellectual disability, which usually emphasize reading and other basic school subjects, budgeting and money matters, and developing of occupational skills, have succeeded in help- ing many people become independent, productive community members. Classes for those with moderate and severe intellectual disability usually have more limited objectives, but they empha- size the development of self-care and other skills—e.g., toilet habits (Wilder et al., 1997)—that enable individuals to function adequately and to be of assistance in either a family (e.g., Heller et al., 1997) or an institutional setting. Just mastering toilet training and learning to eat and dress properly may mean the difference between remaining at home or in a community resi- dence and being institutionalized.
reported spending at least one night in a shelter, public place, or abandoned building (Ringwalt et al., 1998). Another epide- miological study (Susser et al., 1993) reveals that 23 percent of newly homeless men in New York City reported a history of out-of-home care as children. Parental substance abuse has also been found to be associated with the vulnerability of children to develop psychological disorders (Bijttebier & Goethals, 2006). High-risk behaviors or difficult life conditions need to be recognized and taken into consideration (Harrington & Clark, 1998). For example, there are a number of behaviors such as engaging in sexual acts or delinquency and using alcohol or drugs that might place young people at great risk for developing later emotional problems. Moreover, physical or sexual abuse, parental divorce, family turbulence, and homelessness (Cauce et al., 2000; Spataro et al., 2004) can place young people at great risk for emotional distress and subsequent maladaptive behavior (see The World Around Us on p. 542). Dodge and colleagues (1997) found that children from homes with harsh discipline and physical abuse, for example, were more likely to be aggres- sive and conduct disordered than those from homes with less harsh discipline and from nonabusing families.  NEED For TrEATING PArENTS AS wEll AS CHIlDrEN  Because many of the behavior disorders specific to childhood appear to grow out of pathogenic family interactions and result from having parents with psychiatric problems themselves (Johnson et al., 2000), it is often important for the parents, as well as their child, to receive treatment (Dishion & Stormshak, 2007). In some instances, in fact, the treatment program may focus on the parents entirely, as in the case of child abuse. Increasingly, then, the treatment of children has come to mean family therapy in which one or both parents, along with the child and siblings, may participate in all phases of the pro- gram. This is particularly important when the family situation has been identified as involving violence (Chaffin et al., 2004). Many therapists have discovered that fathers are particularly dif- ficult to engage in the treatment process. For working parents and for parents who basically reject the affected child, such treat- ment may be hard to arrange (Gaudin, 1993), especially in the case of poorer families who lack transportation and money. Thus both parental and economic factors help determine which emo- tionally disturbed children will receive assistance.  PoSSIBIlITY oF uSING PArENTS AS CHANGE AGENTS   In essence, parents can be used as change agents by training them in techniques that enable them to help their child. Typically, such training focuses on helping the parents understand their child’s behavior disorder and teaching them to reinforce adaptive behavior while withholding reinforcement for undesirable behav- ior. Encouraging results have been obtained with parents who care about their children and want to help them (Garza et al., 2007). Kazdin, Holland, and Crowley (1997) described a num- ber of barriers to parental involvement in treatment that result  •   Describe some of the physical characteristics of children born with Down syndrome. What is its cause?  •   What is the cause of and the preventive treatment for phenyl- ketonuria (PKU)?  •   Describe rehabilitation approaches to intellectual disability.  Planning Better Programs to Help Children and Adolescents  In our earlier discussion of several disorders of childhood and adolescence, we noted the wide range of treatment procedures available as well as the marked differences in outcomes. In con- cluding this chapter, we will discuss certain special factors asso- ciated with the treatment of children and adolescents that can affect the success of an intervention.  Special Factors Associated with Treatment of Children and Adolescents  Mental health treatment, psychotherapy, and behavior therapy have been found to be as effective with children and adolescents as with adults (Kazdin & Weisz, 2003), but treatments con- ducted in laboratory-controlled studies are more effective than “real-world” treatment situations (Weisz et al., 1995). There are a number of special factors to consider in relation to treatment for children and adolescents, as follows:  THE CHIlD’S INABIlITY To SEEK ASSISTANCE   Most emo- tionally disturbed children who need assistance are not in a posi- tion to ask for help themselves or to transport themselves to and from child-treatment clinics. Thus, unlike an adult, who can usually seek help, a child is dependent, primarily on his or her parents. Adults should realize when a child needs professional help and take the initiative in obtaining it. Often, however, adults are unaware of the problems or neglect this responsibility. The law identifies four areas in which treatment without parental consent is permitted: (1) in the case of mature minors (those considered capable of making decisions about themselves); (2) in the case of emancipated minors (those living indepen- dently, away from their parents); (3) in emergency situations; and (4) in situations in which a court orders treatment. Many children, of course, come to the attention of treatment agencies as a consequence of school referrals, delinquent acts, abuse by parents, or as a result of family custody court cases.  VulNErABIlITIES THAT PlACE CHIlDrEN AT rISK For DEVEloPING EmoTIoNAl ProBlEmS   Children and youth who experience or are exposed to violence are at increased risk for developing psychological disorders (Seifert, 2003). In ad- dition, many families provide an undesirable environment for their growing children (Ammerman et al., 1998). Studies have shown that up to a fourth of American children may be living in inadequate homes and that 7.6 percent of American youth have
or placed elsewhere. In the latter instance, four types of facilities are commonly relied on: (1) foster homes, (2) private institu- tions for the care of children such as group homes, (3) county or state institutions, and (4) the homes of relatives. At any one time, more than half a million children are living in foster-care facilities, many of whom have been abused or neglected (Minnis et al., 2006). The quality of a child’s new home is, of course, a crucial determinant of whether the child’s problems will be alleviated or made worse, and there is evidence to suggest that foster-home placement has more positive effects than group-home placement (Buckley & Zimmermann, 2003; Groza et al., 2003). Efforts are usually made to screen the placement facilities and maintain contact with the situation through follow-up visits, but even so, there have been cases of mistreatment in the new home (Dubner & Motta, 1999; Wilson et al., 2000). In cases of child abuse, in dropout from therapy. For example, coming from a disadvan- taged background, having parents who are antisocial, or having parents who are under great stress tends to result in premature termination of treatment. Research on parental adherence to clinical recommendations has shown that many of the treatment suggestions made during evaluations are not followed by caregiv- ers. However, one recent study by Dreyer and colleagues (2010) found that 81 percent of the recommendations from an ADHD evaluation were followed up.  ProBlEm oF PlACING A CHIlD ouTSIDE THE FAmIlY  Most communities have juvenile facilities that, day or night, will provide protective care and custody for young victims of unfit homes, abandonment, abuse, neglect, and related conditions. Depending on the home situation and the special needs of the child, he or she will later be either returned to his or her parents  the WorlD around us  The Impact of Child Abuse on Psychological Adjustment  C hildren who are physically or sexually abused show problems in social adjustment (Macmillan, 2010) and are particularly likely to feel that the outcomes of events are determined by external factors beyond their own control (Kinzl & Biebl, 1992; Toth et al., 1992). They are also more likely to experience depressive symptoms (Bushnell et al., 1992; Emery & Laumann-Billings, 1998). As a result, abused children are dramatically less likely to assume personal responsibility for themselves, and they generally demonstrate less interpersonal sensitivity than control children. Children who have been abused have been shown to have long-term adjustment problems, for example, in adjustment to college (Elliott, 2009) and adjustment in intimate relationships later in life (Friesen et al., 2010). More- over, child abuse and neglect may initiate a chain of violence. Child abuse is also associated with delinquent and criminal be- havior when the victim grows up. Maxfield and Widom (1996), in a follow-up study of 908 people who were abused as children, found that their arrest rate for nontraffic offenses was signifi- cantly higher than that of a control sample of people who had not been abused as children. Child abuse is an increasing concern in the United States (Crosson-Tower, 2002). A survey of reported incidents of child abuse in this country found that such reports increased 1.7 percent in 1995, the total number of incidents exceeding 3.1 million; an estimated 1,215 children were killed in 1995 in child abuse incidents (National Committee to Prevent Child Abuse, 1996). The excessive use of alcohol or drugs in a fam- ily appears to increase the risk of violent death in the home (Rivera et al., 1997). Some evidence suggests that boys are more often physically abused than girls. It is clear that many children brought to the attention of legal agencies for abuse have been abused before. Moreover, the significantly higher rates among psychiatric inpatients of having been abused as children suggest that such maltreatment plays a causal role in the development of severe psychopathology (Read, 1997). When the abuse involves a sexual component such as incest or rape, the long-range consequences can be profound (Paolucci et al., 2001). Adults who were sexually abused as children often show serious psychological symptoms such as a tendency to use dissociative defense mechanisms to excess, excessive preoc- cupation with bodily functions, lowered self-esteem (Nash et al., 1993), or a tendency to disengage as a means of handling stress (Coffey et al., 1996). The role of sexual abuse in causing psychological problems has been the subject of several longitudinal studies. A large percentage of sexually abused children experience intense psy- chological symptoms following the incident (for example, the 74 percent reported by Bentovim et al., 1987). At follow-up, however, the improvement often seems dramatic (Bentovim et al., 1987; Conte et al., 1986). Several investigators have con- ceptualized the residual symptoms of sexual abuse as a type of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) because the symptoms experienced are similar—for example, nightmares, flashbacks, sleep problems, and feelings of estrangement (Donaldson & Gardner, 1985; Koltek et al., 1998). Child abuse all too frequently produces maladaptive social be- havior in its victims (Winton & Mara, 2001). The treatment of abused children thus needs to address their problems of inad- equate social adjustment, depression, and poor interpersonal skills. However, treatment can be effective if the therapy is tar- geted to specific needs of the child (Harvey & Taylor, 2010).
support programs might operate through school-based interven- tions (Klingman, 1993); or community-based programs might be implemented to reduce the posttraumatic symptoms. Early intervention has the double goal of reducing the stress- ors in a child’s life and strengthening the child’s coping mecha- nisms. It can often reduce the incidence and intensity of later maladjustment, thus averting problems for both the individuals concerned and the broader society. It is apparent that children’s needs can be met only if adequate preventive and treatment facil- ities exist and are available to the children who need assistance.  Family Therapy as a means of Helping Children  To address a child’s problems, it is often necessary to alter pathological family interaction patterns that produce or serve to maintain the child’s behavior problems (Mash & Barkley, 2006). Several family therapy approaches have been developed (Prout & Brown, 2007) that differ in some important ways—for exam- ple, in terms of how the family is defined (whether to include extended family members); what the treatment process will focus on (whether communications between the family members or the aberrant behavior of the problem family members is the focus); and what procedures are used in treatment (analyzing and interpreting hidden messages in the family communications or altering the reward and punishment contingencies through behavioral assessment and reinforcement). But whatever their differences, all family therapies view a child’s problems, at least in part, as an outgrowth of pathological interaction patterns within the family, and they attempt to bring about positive change in family members through analysis and modification of the devi- ant family patterns (Everett & Everett, 2001). Treatment outcome research strongly supports the effective- ness of family therapy in improving disruptive family relation- ships and promoting a more positive atmosphere for children (Shadish et al., 1993).  Child Advocacy Programs  Today there are over 74 million people under age 18 in the United States (U. S. Bureau of the Census, 2009). Children who encounter mental health problems are at substantial risk for adjustment problems in later life (Smith & Smith, 2010). Unfor- tunately, both treatment and preventive programs for our soci- ety’s children remain inadequate for dealing with the extent of psychological problems among children and adolescents. In 1989 the United Nations General Assembly adopted the U.N. Con- vention on the Rights of the Child, which provides a detailed definition of the rights of children in political, economic, social, and cultural areas. This international recognition of the rights of children can potentially have a great impact in promoting the humane treatment of children. However, implementing those high ideals on a practical level is difficult at best. In the United States, one approach that has evolved in recent years is mental health child advocacy. Advocacy programs child abandonment, or a serious childhood behavior problem that parents cannot control, it had often been assumed that the only feasible action was to take the child out of the home and find a temporary substitute. With such a child’s own home so obviously inadequate, the hope was that a more stable outside placement would be better for the child. But when children are taken from their homes and placed in an institution (which promptly tries to change them) or in a series of foster homes (where they obviously do not really belong), they are likely to feel rejected by their own parents, unwanted by their new caretakers, rootless, constantly insecure, lonely, and bitter. Not surprisingly, children and adolescents in foster homes tend to require more mental health services than do other children (dos Reis et al., 2001). Accordingly, the trend today is toward permanent planning. First, every effort is made to hold a family together and to give the parents the support and guidance they need for adequate childrearing. If this is impossible, then efforts are made to free the child legally for adoption and to find an adoptive home as soon as possible. This, of course, means that the public agencies need specially trained staffs with reasonable caseloads and access to resources that they and their clients may need.  VAluE oF INTErVENING BEForE ProBlEmS BEComE ACuTE   Over the last 25 years, a primary concern of many re- searchers and clinicians has been to identify and provide early help for children who are at special risk (Athey et al., 1997). Rather than waiting until these children develop acute psycho- logical problems that may require therapy or major changes in living arrangements, psychologists are attempting to identify conditions in the children’s lives that seem likely to bring about or maintain behavior problems and, where such conditions ex- ist, to intervene before development has been seriously distorted (Schroeder & Gordon, 2002). An example of this approach is provided in the work of Steele and Forehand (1997). These investigators found that children of parents who had a chronic medical condition (the fathers were diagnosed as having hemo- philia, and many were HIV positive) were vulnerable to develop- ing internalizing problems and avoidant behavior, particularly when the parent–child relationship was weak. These symptoms in the child were associated with depression in the parent. The investigators concluded that clinicians may be able to reduce the impact of parental chronic illness by strengthening the parent–child relationship and decreasing the child’s use of avoidant strategies. As described in Chapter 5, another type of early intervention has been developed in response to the special vulnerability children experience in the wake of a disaster or trauma such as a hurricane, accident, hostage-taking, or shooting (Shaw, 2003). Children and adolescents often require considerable support and attention to deal with such traumatic events, which are all too frequent in today’s world. Individual and small-group psychological therapy might be implemented for victims of trauma (Cohen et al., 2006);
disabilities, a great deal of confusion, inconsistency, and uncertainty still persist in the advocacy movement as a whole (Beeman & Edleson, 2000), and there is still a need to improve the accountability of mental health services for children. In addition, the tendency at both federal and state levels has for some time been to cut back on funds for social services. Even so, some important steps have been taken toward child advo- cacy, and new efforts to identify and help high-risk children have been made (National Advisory Mental Health Council, 2007). If the direction and momentum of these efforts can be maintained and if sufficient financial support for them can be procured, the psychological environment for children could substantially improve.  in review  •   What special factors must be considered in providing treatment for children and adolescents?  •   Why is therapeutic intervention a more complicated process with children than with adults?  attempt to help children or others receive services that they need but often are unable to obtain for themselves. In some cases, advocacy seeks to better conditions for underserved populations by changing the system (Pithouse & Crowley, 2007). Federal programs offering services for children are fragmented in that different agencies serve different needs; thus no government agency is charged with considering the whole child and planning comprehensively for children who need help. Consequently, child advocacy is often frustrating and difficult to implement. Outside the federal government, advocacy efforts for chil- dren have until recently been supported largely by legal and special-interest citizen’s groups such as the Children’s Defense Fund, a public interest organization based in Washington, DC. Mental health professionals were typically not involved. Today, however, there is greater interdisciplinary involvement in attempts to provide effective advocacy programs for children (Carlson, 2001; Singer & Singer, 2000). Although such programs have made important local gains toward bettering conditions for children with mental  unresolveD issues  Can Society Deal with Delinquent Behavior?  O ne of the most troublesome and widespread problems in childhood and adolescence is delinquent behavior, especially that involving juvenile violence (Popma, 2007). This behavior includes such acts as destruction of property, vio- lence against other people, and various behaviors contrary to the needs and rights of others and in violation of society’s laws. The term   juvenile delinquency   is a legal one that refers to illegal acts committed by individuals between the ages of 8 and 18 (depending on state law). It is not recognized in the   DSM   as a disorder. The actual incidence of juvenile delinquency is difficult to determine because many delinquent acts are not reported. However, some data are available:  • Of the more than 2 million young people who go through the  juvenile courts each year in the United States, about a mil- lion and a half are there for delinquent acts. About one in five adolescents entering the juvenile justice system suffers from a mental health condition (Phillippi & DePrato, 2010).  • In 2008, there were over 2.1 million juveniles arrested in the  United States, which accounts for about 16 percent of all vio- lent crime arrests; 1,740 juveniles were murder victims (about 11 percent of all murders) (Puzzanchera, 2009).  • A high prevalence of mental health problems has been found  among adolescents in juvenile justice populations (Vermeiren et al., 2006). A significant research literature shows that ado- lescents detained in adult correctional facilities have a high rate of suicide or are likely to commit more crimes when they are released (Bath & Billick, 2010).  • Although most juvenile crime is committed by males, the  rate has also risen for females. Female delinquents are com- monly apprehended for drug use, sex offenses, running away from home, and incorrigibility.  • Both the incidence and the severity of delinquent behav - ior are disproportionately high for lower-class adolescents (Puzzanchera, 2009) with the violent crime arrest rate five times greater for African Americans than whites.  CAuSAl FACTorS  Only a small group of “continuous” delinquents actually evolve from oppositional defiant behavior to conduct disorder and then to adult antisocial personality; most people who engage in delinquent acts as adolescents do not follow this path (Moffitt, 1993a). The individuals who show adolescence- limited delinquency are thought to do so as a result of social mimicry. As they mature, they lose their motivation for delin- quency and gain rewards for more socially acceptable behav- ior. Several key variables seem to play a part in the genesis of delinquency. They fall into the general categories of personal pathology, pathogenic family patterns, and undesirable peer relationships.  Personal Pathology Genetic Determinants   Although the research on genetic determinants of antisocial behavior is far from conclusive, ( continued )
some evidence suggests possible hereditary contributions to criminality (Bailey 2000).  Brain Damage and learning Disability   In a distinct minority of delinquency cases (an estimated 1 percent or less), brain pathology results in lowered inhibitory controls and a tendency toward episodes of violent behavior. Such adolescents are often hyperactive, impulsive, emotionally unstable, and unable to inhibit themselves when strongly stimulated.  Psychological Disorders   Some delinquent acts appear to be directly associated with behavior disorders such as hyperactiv- ity (Freidenfelt & Klinteberg, 2007). One study reported that over half of delinquents show evidence of mental disorders and 14 percent are judged to have mental disorder with sub- stantial impairment that requires a highly restrictive environ- ment (Shelton, 2001).  Antisocial Traits   Many habitual delinquents appear to share the traits typical of antisocial personalities (Bailey, 2000). They are impulsive, defiant, resentful, devoid of feelings of remorse or guilt, incapable of establishing and maintaining close inter- personal ties, and seemingly unable to profit from experience.  Drug Abuse   Many delinquent acts—particularly theft, prostitu- tion, and assault—are directly associated with alcohol or drug use (Leukefeld et al., 1998). Most adolescents who abuse hard drugs such as heroin are forced to steal to maintain their habit. In the case of female addicts, theft may be combined with or replaced by prostitution as a means of obtaining money.  Pathogenic Family Patterns   Of the various family patterns that have been implicated in contributing to juvenile delinquency, the following appear to be the most important.  Parental Absence or Family Conflict   Delinquency appears to be much more common among youths from homes in which parents have separated or divorced than among those from homes in which a parent has died, suggesting that parental conflict may be a key element in causing delinquency.  Parental rejection and Faulty Discipline   In many cases, one or both parents reject a child. When the father is the rejecting parent, it is difficult for a boy to identify with him and use him as a model for his own development. However, the detrimental effects of parental rejection and inconsis- tent discipline are by no means attributable only to fathers. Adolescents who experience alienation from both parents have been found to be more prone to delinquent behavior (Leas & Mellor, 2000).  undesirable Peer relationships  Delinquency tends to be an experience shared by a cultural group (O’Donnell, 2004). In a classic study, Haney and Gold (1973) found that about two-thirds of delinquent acts are committed in association with one or two other people, and most of the remainder involve three or four others. Usually the offender and the companion or companions are of the same sex. Interestingly, girls are more likely than boys to have a constant friend or companion in delinquency. Broad social conditions may also tend to produce or sup- port delinquency (Ward & Laughlin, 2003). An adolescent’s developmental level can have a great deal of influence over how effectively he or she engages with the justice system and resolves his or her problems (Kraus & Pope, 2010). Interrelated factors that appear to be of key importance include alienation and rebellion, social rejection, and the psy- chological support afforded by membership in a delinquent gang. Gang activity remains a widespread problem across the United States, with prevalence rates remaining significantly elevated in 2008 compared with numbers in the early 2000s (U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs,  More than 2 million children a year go through the ju- venile justice system for committing delinquent acts.
2010). Every state and every large city has a gang problem, and gangs are cropping up in small rural towns across the United States as well. The problem of gang membership is most prevalent in lower-SES areas and more common among ethnic minority adolescents (48 percent are African Americans; 43 percent are Hispanic Americans) than among Caucasians. Although young people join gangs for many reasons, most members appear to feel inadequate in and rejected by the larger society. About 1 percent of youth ages 10 to 17 are gang members (Snyder & Sickmund, 2006). One study (Yoder et al., 2003) found that a significant number of homeless youth (32 percent of the sample) become gang members. Gang membership gives them a sense of belong- ing and a means of gaining some measure of status and approval.  DEAlING wITH DElINQuENCY  If juvenile institutions have adequate facilities and personnel, they can be of great help to youth who need to be removed from aversive environments (see Scott, 2010, for a compre- hensive overview). These institutions can give adolescents a chance to learn about themselves and their world, to fur- ther their education and develop needed skills, and to find purpose and meaning in their lives. In such settings, young people may also have the opportunity to receive psychologi- cal counseling and group therapy. The use of “boot camps” (juvenile facilities designed along the lines of army-style basic training) has received some support as a means of intervening in the delinquency process (Weis & Toolis, 2008), although some of the early programs were highly criticized as being both overly harsh and noneffective in bringing about positive change. One early study reported that youth in boot camps viewed their environment as more positive and thera- peutic than did those enrolled in traditional programs and that they showed less antisocial behavior at the end of the training (MacKenzie et al., 2001). However, the harsh, puni- tive programs favored by many “law and order” politicians (as noted by the Washington State Institute for Public Policy, 1995, 1998) often fail because they do not bring about the necessary behavioral changes through reinforcing alternative behaviors (Huey & Henggeler, 2001). The value of the boot camp as a behavioral change approach for young delinquents remains to be determined by research. Behavior therapy techniques based on the assumption that delinquent behavior is learned, maintained, and changed according to the same principles as other learned behavior have shown promise in the rehabilitation of juvenile offend- ers who require institutionalization (Ammerman & Hersen, 1997). Counseling with parents and related environmental changes are generally of vital importance in a total rehabili- tation program (Farrington, 2010), but it is often difficult to get parents involved with incarcerated delinquents.  15.1   How does maladaptive behavior appear in different life periods?  •   Children once were viewed as “miniature adults.” It was not until the second half of the twentieth century that a diagnostic classification system focused clearly on the special problems of children.  •   In this chapter, the   DSM-5   classification system is followed in order to provide clinical descriptions of a wide range of child- hood behavior problems.  15.2   what are the common disorders of childhood?  •   Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is one of the more com- mon behavior problems of childhood. In this disorder, the child shows impulsive, overactive behavior that interferes with his or her ability to accomplish tasks.  15   summary  •   The major approaches to treating children with ADHD have been medication and behavior therapy. Using medications such as amphetamines with children is somewhat controversial. Behavior therapy, particularly cognitive-behavioral methods, has shown a great deal of promise in modifying the behavior of chil- dren with hyperactivity.  •   In conduct disorder, a child engages in persistent aggressive or antisocial acts. The possible causes of conduct disorder or delin- quent behavior include biological factors, personal pathology, family patterns, and peer relationships.  15.3   Do anxiety and depression appear in children and adolescents?  •   Children who suffer from anxiety or depressive disorders typi- cally do not cause trouble for others through their aggressive conduct. Rather, they are fearful, shy, withdrawn, and insecure and have difficulty adapting to outside demands.  •   The anxiety disorders may be characterized by extreme anxiety, withdrawal, or avoidance behavior. A likely cause is early family relationships that generate anxiety and prevent the child from developing more adaptive coping skills.
key terms  Adderall   514  attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)   511  autism spectrum disorder   527  conduct disorder   516  developmental psychopathology   510  Down syndrome   536  dyslexia   532  echolalia   529  encopresis   525  enuresis   525  hydrocephaly   539  intellectual disability   534  juvenile delinquency   515  learning disorders   532  macrocephaly   539  mainstreaming   540  microcephaly   539  neurodevelopmental disorders   527  oppositional defiant disorder (oDD)   515  Pemoline   513  phenylketonuria (PKu)   538  ritalin   513  separation anxiety disorder   518  sleepwalking disorder   526  Strattera   513  tic   526  Tourette’s disorder   527  15.4   what are some specific disorders that occur in childhood?  •   Several other disorders of childhood involve behavior problems characterized by a single outstanding symptom rather than per- vasive maladaptive patterns. The symptoms may involve enuresis, encopresis, sleepwalking, or tics.  15.5   what are intellectual disabilities?  •   Specific learning disorders are those in which failure of mastery is limited to circumscribed areas, chiefly involving academic skills such as reading. General cognitive ability may be normal or superior.  •   Affected children are commonly described as learning disabled (LD). Some localized defect in brain development is often con- sidered the primary cause of the disorder. Learning disorders create great turmoil and frustration in victims, their families, schools, and professional helpers.  •   When serious organic brain impairment occurs before the age of 18, the cognitive and behavioral deficits experienced are referred to as intellectual disability. Relatively common forms of such intellectual disability, which in these cases is normally at least moderate in severity, include Down syndrome, phenylketonuria (PKU), and certain cranial anomalies.  •   This organic type of mental deficit accounts for only some 25 percent of all cases of intellectual disability.  •   In children with autism spectrum disorders, extreme maladaptive behavior occurs during the early years and prevents affected chil- dren from developing psychologically.  •   It has not been possible to normalize the behavior of children with autism through treatment, but newer instructional and behavior modification techniques have been helpful in improving the functioning of less severely impaired children with autism.  15.6   How can we plan better programs to help children and adolescents?  •   We reviewed a number of potential causes for the disorders of childhood and adolescence. Although genetic predisposition appears to be important in several disorders, parental psychopa- thology, family disruption, and stressful circumstances (such as parental death or desertion and child abuse) can also contribute.  •   There are special problems, and special opportunities, involved in treating childhood disorders. The need for preventive and treat- ment programs for children is always growing, and in recent years child advocacy has become effective in some states. Unfortunately, the financing and resources necessary for such services are not always readily available, and the future of programs for improving psychological environments for children remains uncertain.
16  learning objectives  16.1  Who seeks therapy and what are the goals of therapy?  16.2  How is the success of psychotherapy measured?  16.3  What are some of the factors that must be considered to provide optimal treatment?  16.4  What psychological approaches are used to treat abnormal behavior?  16.5  What roles do social values and culture play in psychotherapy?  16.6  What biological approaches to treating abnormal behavior are available?  Most of us have experienced a time or situation when we were dramatically helped by talking things over with a relative or friend. Most therapists, like all good listeners, rely on receptive- ness, warmth, and empathy and take a nonjudgmental approach to the problems their clients present. But there is more to therapy than just giving someone an opportunity to talk. Therapists also introduce into the relation- ship psychological interventions that are designed to promote new understandings, behaviors, or both on the client’s part. The fact that these interventions are deliberately planned and sys- tematically guided by certain theoretical preconceptions is what distinguishes professional therapy from more informal helping relationships.  An Overview of Treatment  The belief that people with psychological problems can change— can learn more adaptive ways of perceiving, evaluating, and behaving—is the conviction underlying all   psychotherapy . Achieving these changes is by no means easy. Sometimes a person’s view of the world and her or his self-concept are dis- torted because of pathological early relationships that have been reinforced by years of negative life experiences. In other instances, environmental factors such as an unsatisfying job, an unhappy relationship, or financial stresses must be the focus of attention in addition to psychotherapy. Because change can be hard, people sometimes find it easier to bear their present problems than to challenge themselves to chart a different life course. Therapy also takes time. Even a highly skilled and experienced therapist cannot undo a person’s entire past history and, within a short time, prepare him or her to cope adequately with difficult life situations. Therapy offers no magical transformations. Nevertheless, it holds promise even for the most severe mental disorders. Moreover, contrary to common opinion, psychotherapy can be less expensive in the long run than alternative modes of intervention (Dobson et al., 2008; Gabbard et al., 1997). Numerous therapeutic approaches exist, ranging from psy- choanalysis to Zen meditation. However, the era of managed care has prompted new and increasingly stringent demands that the efficacy of treatments be empirically demonstrated. This chapter will explore some of the most widely accepted psychological and biological treatment approaches in use today. Although we recognize that different groups of mental health professionals often have their own preferences with respect to the use of the terms   client   and   patient , in this chapter we use the terms interchangeably.  Why Do People Seek Therapy?  People who seek therapy vary widely in their problems and in their motivations to solve them. Below we explore a few such motivations.  STreSSful CurrenT life CirCumSTanCeS   Perhaps the most obvious candidates for psychological treatment are people experiencing sudden and highly stressful situations such as a di- vorce or unemployment—people who feel so overwhelmed by a crisis that they cannot manage on their own. These people often feel quite vulnerable and tend to be open to psychological treat- ment because they are motivated to alter their present intolerable mental states. In such situations, clients may gain considerably— and in a brief time—from the perspective provided by their therapists.  PeoPle WiTh long-STanDing ProblemS   Other people entering therapy have experienced long-term psychological dis- tress and have lengthy histories of maladjustment. They may have had interpersonal problems such as an inability to be com- fortable with intimacy, or they may have felt susceptible to low moods that are difficult for them to shake. Chronic unhappiness and the inability to feel confident and secure may finally prompt them to seek outside help. These people seek psychological as- sistance out of dissatisfaction and despair. They may enter treat- ment with a high degree of motivation, but as therapy proceeds, their persistent patterns of maladaptive behavior may generate
resistance with which a therapist must contend. For example, a narcissistic client who expects to be praised by his or her therapist may become disenchanted and hostile when such ego “strokes” are not forthcoming.  reluCTanT ClienTS   Some people enter therapy by a more indirect route. Perhaps they had consulted a physician for their headaches or stomach pains, only to be told that nothing was physically wrong with them. After they are referred to a thera- pist, they may at first resist the idea that their physical symptoms are emotionally based. Motivation to enter treatment differs widely among psychotherapy clients. Reluctant clients may come from many situations—for example, a person with a substance abuse problem whose spouse threatens “either therapy or di- vorce,” or a suspected felon whose attorney advises that things will go better at trial if it can be announced that the suspect has “entered therapy.” A substantial number of angry parents bring their children to therapists with demands that their child’s “problematic behavior,” which they view as independent of the family context, be “fixed.” These parents may be surprised and reluctant to recognize their own roles in shaping their child’s behavior patterns. In general, males are more reluctant to seek help of any kind when they are experiencing problems than females are. In the case of depression, far more men than women say that they would never consider seeing a therapist; when men are depressed they are even reluctant to seek informal help from their friends. Moreover, when men do seek professional help, they tend to ask fewer questions than women do (see Addis & Mahalik, 2003). Why should this be? One answer is that men are less able than women to recognize and label feelings of distress and to identify these feelings as emotional problems. In addition, men who subscribe to masculine stereotypes emphasizing self-reliance and lack of emotionality also tend to experience more gender- role conflict when they consider traditional counseling, with its focus on emotions and emotional disclosure. For a man who prides himself on being emotionally stoic, seeking help for a problem like depression may present a major threat to his self- esteem. Seeking help also requires giving up some control and may run counter to the ideology that “a real man helps himself.” How can men be encouraged to seek help when they have difficulties? Part of the solution may be to develop new treat- ment approaches that provide a better fit for men who see little value in talking about their problems. An example here might be the use of virtual reality therapy to treat soldiers with posttrau- matic stress disorder (PTSD; see Chapter 5). Another strategy is to use more creative approaches to encourage men to seek help and support. For example, television commercials for erectile dysfunction use professional basketball players and football coaches to encourage men with similar problems to “step up to the plate” and talk to their doctors. Making men more aware of other “masculine men” who have been “man enough” to go for help when they needed it may be an important step toward edu- cating those whose adherence to masculine gender roles makes it difficult for them to acknowledge and seek help for their problems.  PeoPle Who Seek PerSonal groWTh   A final group of people who enter therapy have problems that would be con- sidered relatively normal. That is, they appear to have achieved success, have financial stability, have generally accepting and loving families, and have accomplished many of their life goals. They enter therapy not out of personal despair or impossible interpersonal involvements but out of a sense that they have not lived up to their own expectations and realized their own potential. These people, partly because their problems are more manageable than the problems of others, may make substantial gains in personal growth. Psychotherapy, however, is not just for people who have clearly defined problems, high levels of motivation, and an ability to gain insight into their behavior. Psychotherapeutic interventions have been applied to a wide variety of chronic problems. Even severely disturbed clients with psychosis may profit from a therapeutic relationship that takes into account their level of functioning and maintains therapeutic subgoals that are within their capabilities (e.g., Kendler, 1999; Valmaggia et al., 2008). It should be clear from these brief descriptions that there is no typical client. Neither is there a model therapy. No cur- rently used form of therapy is applicable to all types of clients, and all of the standard therapies can document some successes. Most authorities agree that client variables such as motivation to change and severity of symptoms are exceedingly important to the outcome of therapy (Clarkin & Levy, 2004). As we will see, the various therapies have relatively greater success when a thera- pist takes the characteristics of a particular client into account in determining treatment approaches.  Who Provides Psychotherapeutic Services?  Members of many different professions have traditionally pro- vided advice and counsel to individuals in emotional distress. Physicians, in addition to caring for their patients’ physical prob- lems, often become trusted advisers in emotional matters as well. Many physicians are trained to recognize psychological problems that are beyond their expertise and to refer patients to psycho- logical specialists or to psychiatrists. Another professional group that deals extensively with emotional problems is the clergy. A minister, priest, or rabbi is frequently the first professional to encounter a person experienc- ing an emotional crisis. Although some clergy are trained mental health counselors, most limit their counseling to religious mat- ters and spiritual support and do not attempt to provide psycho- therapy. Rather, like general-practice physicians, they are trained to recognize problems that require professional management and to refer seriously disturbed people to mental health specialists.
The three types of mental health professionals who most often administer psychological treatment in mental health set- tings are clinical psychologists, psychiatrists, and psychiatric social workers. In addition to their being able to provide psy- chotherapy, the medical training and licensure qualifications of psychiatrists enable them to prescribe psychoactive medications and also to administer other forms of medical treatment such as electroconvulsive therapy. In some states, appropriately super- vised psychologists and other clinical specialists may prescribe medications if they have received additional training. Although mental health professionals differ with respect to their training and approach to treatment, generally, psychiatrists differ from psychologists insofar as they treat mental disorders using biologi- cal approaches (e.g., medications), whereas psychologists treat patients’ problems by examining and in some cases changing their patients’ behaviors and thought patterns. In a clinic or hospital (as opposed to an individual prac- tice), a wide range of treatment approaches may be used. These range from the use of medications, to individual or group psychotherapy, to home, school, or job visits aimed at modify- ing adverse conditions in a client’s life—for example, helping a teacher become more understanding and supportive of a child- client’s needs. Often the latter is as important as treatment directed toward modifying the client’s personality, behavior, or both. This willingness to use a variety of procedures is reflected in the frequent use of a team approach to assessment and treat- ment, particularly in group practice and institutional settings. This approach ideally involves the coordinated efforts of medi- cal, psychological, social work, and other mental health person- nel working together as the needs of each case warrant. Also of key importance is the current practice of providing treatment facilities in the community. Instead of considering maladjust- ment to be an individual’s private misery, which in the past often required confinement in a distant mental hospital, this approach integrates family and community resources in a total treatment approach.  The Therapeutic relationship  The therapeutic relationship evolves out of what both client and therapist bring to the therapeutic situation. The outcome of psy- chotherapy normally depends on whether the client and thera- pist are successful in achieving a productive working alliance. The client’s major contribution is his or her motivation. Clients who are pessimistic about their chances of recovery or who are ambivalent about dealing with their problems and symptoms respond less well to treatment (e.g., Mussell et al., 2000). The establishment of an effective working alliance between client and therapist is seen by most investigators and practitio- ners as essential to psychotherapeutic gain. Our experiences as therapists affirm this basic observation, as does the research lit- erature. In a very real sense, the relationship with the therapist is therapeutic in its own right. Studies of the therapeutic relation- ship show that how well patients do over the course of therapy is predicted by the ability of their therapist to form a strong alli- ance with them (Baldwin et al., 2007). Although definitions of the therapeutic alliance vary, its key elements are (1) a sense of working collaboratively on the prob- lem, (2) agreement between patient and therapist about the goals and tasks of therapy, and (3) an affective bond between patient and therapist (see Constantino et al., 2001; Martin et al., 2000). Clear communication is also important. This is no doubt facili- tated by the degree of shared experience in the backgrounds of client and therapist. Almost as important as motivation is a client’s expectation of receiving help. This expectancy is often sufficient in itself to bring about substantial improvement, perhaps because patients who expect therapy to be effective engage more in the process (Meyer et al., 2002). Just as a placebo often lessens pain for someone who believes it will do so, a person who expects to be  Often the first per- son that someone experiencing an emotional crisis will talk to is a trusted member of his or her religious community.  What are some of the key elements of an effective therapeutic alliance between client and therapist?
helped by therapy is likely to be helped, almost regardless of the particular methods used by a therapist. The downside of this fact is that if a therapy or therapist fails for whatever reason to inspire client confidence, the effectiveness of treatment is likely to be compromised. To the art of therapy, a therapist brings a variety of profes- sional skills and methods intended to help people see themselves and their situations more objectively—that is, to gain a different perspective. Besides helping provide a new perspective, most therapy situations also offer a client a safe setting in which he or she is encouraged to practice new ways of feeling and acting, gradually developing both the courage and the ability to take responsibility for acting in more effective and satisfying ways. To bring about such changes, an effective psychotherapist must help the client give up old and dysfunctional behavior patterns and replace them with new, functional ones. Because clients will present varying challenges in this regard, the therapist must be flexible enough to use a variety of interactive styles.  in review  Why do people seek therapy? What kinds of professionals provide help to people in psycho- logical distress? In what kinds of settings does treatment occur? What factors are important in determining how well patients do in therapy?  Measuring Success in Psychotherapy  Evaluating treatment success is not always as easy as it might seem (Hill & Lambert, 2004). Attempts at estimating clients’ gains in therapy generally depend on one or more of the fol- lowing sources of information: (1) a therapist’s impression of changes that have occurred, (2) a client’s reports of change, (3) reports from the client’s family or friends, (4) comparison of pretreatment and posttreatment scores on personality tests or other instruments designed to measure relevant facets of psy- chological functioning, and (5) measures of change in selected overt behaviors. Unfortunately, each of these sources has its own limitations. A therapist may not be the best judge of a client’s progress because any therapist is likely to be biased in favor of seeing him- self or herself as competent and successful (after all, therapists are only human). In addition, the therapist typically has only a limited observational sample (the client’s in-session behavior) from which to make judgments of overall change. Furthermore, therapists can inflate improvement averages by deliberately or subtly encouraging difficult clients to discontinue therapy. The problem of how to deal with early dropouts from treatment fur- ther complicates many studies of therapy outcomes. Should these patients be excluded from analyses of outcome? (After all, they have received little or none of the therapy being evaluated.) Or should they be included and counted as treatment failures? These issues have been at the heart of much debate and discussion. Also, a client is not necessarily a reliable source of informa- tion on therapeutic outcomes. Not only may clients want to believe for various personal reasons that they are getting bet- ter, but in an attempt to please the therapist they may report that they are being helped. In addition, because therapy often requires a considerable investment of time, money, and some- times emotional distress, the idea that it has been useless is a dis- sonant one. Relatives of the client may also be inclined to “see” the improvement they had hoped for, although they often seem to be more realistic than either the therapist or the client in their evaluations of outcome. Clinical ratings by an outside, independent observer are sometimes used in research on psychotherapy outcomes to evalu- ate the progress of a client; these ratings may be more objective than ratings made by those directly involved in the therapy. Another widely used objective measure of client change is perfor- mance on various psychological tests. A client evaluated in this way takes a battery of tests before and after therapy, and the dif- ferences in scores are assumed to reflect progress, or lack of prog- ress, or occasionally even deterioration. However, some of the changes that such tests show may be artifactual, as with   regres- sion to the mean , wherein very high (or very low) scores tend on repeated measurement to drift toward the average of their own distributions, yielding a false impression that some real change has been documented. Also, the particular tests selected are likely to focus on the theoretical predictions of the therapist or researcher. Thus they are not necessarily valid predictors of the changes, if any, that the therapy actually induces or of how the client will behave in real life. And without follow-up assessment, they provide little information on how enduring any change is likely to be.  objectifying and Quantifying Change  Generalized terms such as   recovery ,   marked improvement , and  moderate improvement , which were often used in outcome research in the past, are open to considerable differences in interpretation. Today the emphasis is on using more quantitative  research Close-up  Regression to the Mean  This reflects the statistical tendency for extreme scores (e.g., very high or very low scores) on a given measure to look less extreme at a second assessment (as occurs in a repeated- measures design). Because of this statistical artifact, people whose scores are farthest away from the group mean to begin with (e.g., people who have the highest anxiety scores or the lowest scores on self-esteem) will tend to score closer to the group mean at the second assessment, even if no real clinical change has occurred.
methods of measuring change. For example, the Beck Depression Inventory (a self-report measure of depression severity) and the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (a set of rating scales used by clinicians to measure the same thing) both yield summary scores and have become almost standard in the pre- and post- therapy assessment of depression. Changes in preselected and specifically denoted behaviors that are systematically monitored, such as how many times a client with obsessions about contami- nation washes his or her hands, are often highly valid measures of outcome. Such techniques, including client self-monitoring, have been widely and effectively used, mainly by behavioral and cognitive-behavioral therapists. In research settings, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) can be used to examine brain activity before and after treatment. For example, Nakao and colleagues (2005) studied 10 outpatients with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). At the start of the study, all the patients received a brain scan while they were engaged in a task that required them to think about words (e.g., sweat, urine, feces) that triggered their obsessions and compulsions. Patients were then treated for 12 weeks either with the SSRI (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor) fluvox- amine (Luvox) or with behavior therapy. At the end of this treat- ment period, the brain scanning was repeated. The results showed that, before treatment, certain areas of the brain thought to be involved in OCD (e.g., a brain region in the frontal lobe called the orbitofrontal cortex) were activated during the symptom-provocation task. However, after therapy, these same regions showed much less activation when the patients were challenged to think about the provocative trigger words. In subsequent research these scientists have also shown that, after 12 weeks of behavior therapy, patients with OCD again show changes in several brain regions that are implicated in this disorder (Nabeyama et al., 2008). Research of this type sug- gests that physiological changes may indeed accompany the clini- cal gains that occur in psychotherapy (see Siegle et al., 2012). It is important to keep in mind, however, that changes on rating scales (or on MRI scans) do not necessarily tell us how well the patient is functioning in everyday life (Kazdin, 2008).  Would Change occur anyway?  What happens to disturbed people who do not obtain formal treatment? In view of the many ways in which people can help each other, it is not surprising that improvement often occurs without professional intervention. Moreover, some forms of psychopathology such as depressive episodes or brief psychotic disorder sometimes run a fairly short course with or without treatment. In other instances, disturbed people improve over time for reasons that are not apparent. Even if many emotionally disturbed persons tend to improve over time without psychotherapy, psychotherapy can often accelerate improvement or bring about desired behav- ior change that might not otherwise occur. Most researchers today would agree that psychotherapy is more effective than no treatment (see Shadish et al., 2000), and indeed the pertinent evidence, widely cited throughout this entire text, confirms this strongly. The chances of an average client benefiting significantly from psychological treatment are, overall, impressive (Lambert & Ogles, 2004). Research suggests that about 50 percent of patients show clinically significant change after 21 therapy sessions. After 40 sessions, about 75 percent of patients have improved (Lambert et al., 2001). But   why   do patients improve? Remarkably, we know very little about the mechanisms through which therapeutic change occurs, or about the “active ingredients” of effective therapy (Kazdin, 2008; Hayes et al., 2011). We do know that progress in therapy is not always smooth and linear, however. Sudden gains can occur between one therapy session and another (Tang & DeRubeis, 1999; Tang et al., 2002). These clinical leaps appear to be triggered by cognitive changes or by psychodynamic insights that patients experience in certain critical sessions. Researchers are now actively exploring how such factors as thera- pist adherence (how well a therapist delivers a particular type of therapy) and therapist competence (how skillfully the therapist administers the therapy) impact how well the patient does (see Webb et al., 2010). For patients receiving cognitive therapy for depression, therapist competence has been shown to be a predictor of better clinical outcome, as might be expected (Strunk et al., 2010).  Can Therapy be harmful?  The outcomes of psychotherapy are not invariably either neutral (no effect) or positive. Some clients are actually harmed by their encounters with psychotherapists (see The World Around Us box). According to one estimate, somewhere between 5 and 10 percent of clients deteriorate during treatment (Lambert & Ogles, 2004). Patients suffering from borderline personality disorder and from OCD typically have higher rates of nega- tive treatment outcomes than do patients with other problems (Mohr, 1995). Problems in the therapeutic alliance account for some instances of treatment failure. For example, a mismatch of thera- pist and client personality characteristics may produce deterio- rating outcomes. Our impression, supported by some evidence (see Beutler et al., 2004; Castonguay et al., 2010), is that certain therapists, probably for reasons of personality or lack of interper- sonal skills, just do not do well with certain types of client prob- lems. In light of these intangible factors, it is ethically required of all therapists (1) to monitor their work with various types of clients to discover any such deficiencies and (2) to refer to other therapists those clients with whom they may be ill-equipped to work (American Psychological Association, 2002). Unfortunately, clinicians are often quite bad at recogniz- ing when their clients are not doing well (Whipple & Lambert, 2011). To address this problem, research-based measures to assess clinical deterioration are now being developed. If clini- cians are willing to use these in their routine clinical practice,
they will be able to be warned when their clients are not pro- gressing in an expected manner. A major hurdle, however, is implementation. We would not be surprised to learn that the worst therapists are the ones most reluctant to use such patient- monitoring methods. A special case of therapeutic harm concerns what are called  boundary violations . This is when the therapist behaves in ways that exploit the trust of the patient or engages in behavior that is highly inappropriate (e.g., taking the patient to dinner, giv- ing the patient gifts). One case involved a patient who had been treated by a psychiatrist for 10 years. During this time the patient gave the therapist gifts of a refrigerator and a dining table and six chairs. She also sold him her Waterford crystal, her china, and a silver service. The silver had an appraised value of $1,600. However, it was purchased by the psychiatrist for only $200. The psychiatrist also sold the patient two of his boats, without her even having seen them (Norris et al., 2003). A sexual relationship between the patient and the therapist represents perhaps the most obvious and extreme example of a serious boundary violation. This is highly unethical conduct. Given the frequently intense and intimate quality of therapeutic relationships, it is not surprising that sexual attraction arises. However, it is the therapist’s professional responsibility to main- tain the appropriate boundaries at all times. When exploitive and unprofessional behavior on the part of therapists does occur, it results in great harm to patients (Norris et al., 2003). Anyone seeking therapy needs to be sufficiently aware enough to deter- mine that the therapist she or he has chosen is committed to high ethical and professional standards. For the vast majority of therapists, this is indeed the case.  in review  What approaches can be used to evaluate treatment success? What are the advantages and limitations of these approaches? Do people who receive psychological treatment always show a clinical benefit? What is a boundary violation? Give three examples.  What Therapeutic Approaches Should Be Used?  Before optimal treatment can be provided, a number of impor- tant decisions must be made. In the sections below we consider some of the factors that are important.  evidence-based Treatment  When a pharmaceutical company develops a new drug, it must obtain approval of the drug from the federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before that drug can be marketed. This involves, among other things, demonstrating through research on human subjects that the drug has   efficacy —that is, the drug does what it is supposed to do in curing or relieving some target condition. These tests, using voluntary and informed patients as subjects, are called   randomized clinical trials (RCTs)   or, more simply,   efficacy trials . Although these trials may become quite elaborate, the basic design is one of randomly assigning (e.g., by the flip of a coin) half the patients to the supposedly “active” drug and the other half to a visually identical but physiologically inactive placebo. Usually, neither the patient nor the prescriber is informed which is to be administered; that information is  the World around us  When Therapy Harms  T here are many ways in which therapy can be detrimental. For example, a particular therapy might make certain symptoms worse, make a person more concerned about the symptoms they do have, or make the client excessively de- pendent on the therapist in order to function. Encounters with some therapists or forms of therapy may also make a person less willing to seek therapy in the future. Lilienfeld (2007) has developed a list of therapies that have potentially harmful consequences. One example is “rebirthing” therapy for children with attachment problems. This approach, which involves therapists wrapping children in blankets, sitting on them, and squeezing them in an attempt to mirror the birth process, has resulted in several children dying of suffocation. Another problematic technique is facilitated communication, which is based on the premise that children with autism can communicate if they have the assistance of a facilitator who helps the child communicate using a computer keyboard. Facili- tated communication has been linked to dozens of child sexual abuse allegations against the parents of children with autism. This has exposed these families to a great deal of needless emo- tional pain and suffering because studies show that the com- munications in facilitated communication do not come from the children themselves. Rather, they are unknowingly generated by the facilitators themselves as they guide the child’s hands over the keyboard. All practicing clinicians and therapists owe it to their clients (and to the families of their clients) to educate themselves about research on potentially harmful treatments. They should also monitor their own behavior and adhere to high ethical standards of practice. In this way they can minimize the likelihood that they will cause damage to the people who come to them seeking help.
recorded in code by a third party. This   double-blind procedure  (see  ) is an effort to ensure that expectations on the part of the patient and prescriber play no role in the study. After a predetermined treatment interval, the code is broken and the active-drug or placebo status of all subjects is revealed. If subjects on the active drug have improved in health significantly more than subjects on the placebo, the investigator has evidence of the drug’s efficacy. Obviously, the same design could be modified to compare the efficacy of two or more active drugs, with the option of adding a placebo condition. Thousands of such studies are in progress daily across the country. They usually take place in academic medical settings, and many are financially supported by the pharmaceutical industry. Investigators of psychotherapy outcomes have attempted to apply this research design to their own field of inquiry, with necessary modifications (see Chambless & Ollendick, 2001). A source of persistent frustration has been the difficulty of creat- ing a placebo condition that will appear credible to patients. Most such research has thus adopted the strategy of either comparing two or more purportedly “active” therapies or using a no-treatment (“wait list”) control of the same duration as the active-drug treatment. However, withholding treatment from patients in need (even temporarily) by placing them on a wait list sometimes raises ethical concerns. Another problem is that therapists, even those with the same theoretical orientations, often differ markedly in the manner in which they deliver therapy. (In contrast, pills of the same chemical compound and dosage do not vary.) To test a given therapy, it therefore becomes necessary to develop a treatment manual to specify just how the therapy under examination will be delivered. Therapists in the research trial are then trained (and moni- tored) to make sure that their therapy sessions do not deviate significantly from the procedures outlined in the manual (e.g., see Blum et al., 2008). Efforts to “manualize” therapy represent one way that researchers have tried to minimize the variability in patients’ clinical outcomes that might result from characteristics of the therapist themselves (such as personal charisma). Although  manualized therapies   originated principally to standard- ize psychosocial treatments to fit the RCT paradigm, some therapists recommend extending their use to routine clinical practice after efficacy for particular disorders has been estab- lished (e.g., see Wilson, 1998). Practicing clinicians, however, vary in their attitudes toward treatment manuals (Addis & Krasnow, 2000). Efficacy, or RCT, studies of psychosocial treatments are increasingly common. These time-limited studies typically focus on patients who have a single   DSM   diagnosis (patients with comorbid diagnoses are sometimes excluded) and involve two or more treatment or control (e.g., wait list) conditions, where at least one of the treatment conditions is psychosocial (another could be some biological therapy, such as a particular drug). Client-participants are randomly assigned to these conditions, whose effects, if any, are evaluated systematically with a common battery of assessment instruments, usually administered both before and after treatment. Efficacy studies of the outcomes of specific psychosocial treatment procedures are considered the most rigorous type of evaluation researchers have for establishing that a given therapy “works” for clients with a given diagnosis. Treatments that meet this standard are often described as   evidence   based   or   empirically supported .  medication or Psychotherapy?  Advances in   psychopharmacology   have allowed many people who would otherwise need hospitalization to remain with their families and function in the community. These advances have also reduced the time patients need to spend in the hospital and have made restraints and locked wards largely relics of the past. In short, medication has led to a much more favorable hospital climate for patients and staff alike. Nevertheless, certain issues arise in the use of psychotropic drugs. Aside from possible unwanted side effects, there is the complexity of matching drug and drug dosage to the needs of the specific patient. It is also sometimes necessary for patients to change medication in the course of treatment. In addition, the use of medications in isolation from other treatment methods may not be ideal for some disorders because drugs themselves generally do not cure disorders. Nonetheless, there is now a national trend toward greater use of psychiatric medications at the expense of psychotherapy. This may be problematic because, as many investigators have pointed out, drugs tend to alleviate symptoms by inducing biochemical changes, not by helping the individual understand and change the personal or situational fac- tors that may be creating or reinforcing maladaptive behaviors. Moreover, when drugs are discontinued, patients may be at risk of relapsing (Dobson et al., 2008). For many disorders, a variety of evidence-based forms of psychotherapy may produce more long-lasting benefits than medications alone unless the medica- tions are continued indefinitely.  Combined Treatments  The integration of medication and psychotherapy remains common in clinical practice, particularly for disorders such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (Olfson & Marcus, 2010). Such integrated approaches are also appreciated and regarded as essential by the patients themselves. The integrative approach is a good example of the biopsychosocial perspective that best describes current thinking about mental disorders and that is reflected throughout this book. Medications can be combined with a broad range of psycho- logical approaches. In some cases, they can help patients benefit more fully from psychotherapy. For example, patients with social anxiety disorder who receive exposure therapy do much better if they are given an oral dose of D-cycloserine before each session.
D-cycloserine is an antibiotic used in the treatment of tubercu- losis. When taken alone, it has no effect on anxiety. However, D-cycloserine activates a receptor that is critical in facilitating extinction of anxiety. By making the receptor work better, the therapeutic benefits of exposure training are enhanced in people taking D-cycloserine versus placebo (Guastella et al., 2008; Hofman et al., 2006). Typically, psychosocial interventions are combined with psychiatric medications. This may be especially beneficial for patients with severe disorders (see Gabbard & Kay, 2001). Keller and colleagues (2000) compared the outcomes of 519 depressed patients who were treated with an antidepressant (nefazodone), with psychotherapy (cognitive-behavioral), or with a combination of both of these treatments. In the medication-alone condition, 55 percent of patients did well. In the psychotherapy-alone condi- tion, 52 percent of patients responded to treatment. However, patients for whom the two treatments were combined did even better, with an overall positive response rate of 85 percent. Quite possibly, combined treatment is effective because medications and psychotherapy may target different symptoms and work at differ- ent rates. As Hollon and Fawcett (1995) have noted, “Pharmaco- therapy appears to provide rapid, reliable relief from acute distress, and psychotherapy appears to provide broad and enduring change, with combined treatment retaining the specific benefits of each” (p. 1232). It is important to note that combined treatments are not always superior to single treatments. Adding psychiatric medica- tions does not generally improve the clinical efficacy of psycho- social treatments for anxiety disorders, for example. However, for people suffering from chronic or recurrent depression, combined treatments often result in better clinical outcomes (Aaronson et al., 2007).  in review  What are the advantages and drawbacks of using a manualized therapy? What does it mean to describe a treatment as evidence based? For what kinds of disorders is combination therapy superior?  Psychosocial Approaches to Treatment  People are fascinated by psychotherapy. As practicing therapists, we are often asked about the work that we do and the kinds of patients we see. In this section, we try to give you a sense of the different clinical approaches that therapists sometimes use. Although we have discussed treatment in the earlier chapters in the context of specific disorders, our goal here is to provide you with a better sense of the different therapeutic approaches, illus- trating them with case studies whenever possible.  behavior Therapy  Behavior therapy   is a direct and active treatment that recognizes the importance of behavior, acknowledges the role of learning, and includes thorough assessment and evaluation. Instead of explor- ing past traumatic events or inner conflicts, behavior therapists focus on the presenting problem—the problem or symptom that is causing the patient great distress. A major assumption of behavior therapy is that abnormal behavior is acquired in the same way as normal behavior—that is, by learning. A variety of behav- ioral techniques have therefore been developed to help patients “unlearn” maladaptive behaviors by one means or another.  exPoSure TheraPy   As you know, a behavior therapy tech- nique that is widely used in the treatment of anxiety disorders is exposure (see Chapter 6). If anxiety is learned, then, from the behavior therapy perspective, it can be unlearned. This is accomplished through guided exposure to anxiety-provoking stimuli. During exposure therapy, the patient or client is con- fronted with the fear-producing stimulus in a therapeutic man- ner. This can be accomplished in a very controlled, slow, and gradual way, as in   systematic desensitization , or in a more extreme manner, as in   flooding , in which the patient directly confronts the feared stimulus at full strength. (An example is a housebound patient with agoraphobia being accompanied out- doors by the therapist.) Moreover, the form of the exposure can be real (also known as   in vivo   exposure ) or imaginary ( imaginal exposure ). The rationale behind systematic desensitization is quite simple: Find a behavior that is incompatible with being anx- ious (such as being relaxed or experiencing something pleas- ant) and repeatedly pair this with the stimulus that provokes anxiety in the patient. Because it is difficult if not impossible to feel both pleasant and anxious at the same time, systematic desensitization is aimed at teaching a person, while in the pres- ence (real or imagined) of the anxiety-producing stimulus, to relax or behave in some other way that is inconsistent with anxiety. It may therefore be considered a type of countercondi- tioning procedure. The term systematic refers to the carefully graduated manner in which the person is exposed to the feared stimulus. The prototype of systematic desensitization is the classic experiment of Mary Cover Jones (1924), in which she success- fully eliminated a small boy’s fears of a white rabbit and other furry animals. She began by bringing the rabbit just inside the door at the far end of the room while the boy, Peter, was eating. On successive days, the rabbit was gradually brought closer until Peter could pat it with one hand while eating with the other. Joseph Wolpe (1958; Rachman & Hodgson, 1980) elabo- rated on the procedure developed by Jones and coined the phrase  systematic desensitization   to refer to it. On the assumption that most anxiety-based patterns are, fundamentally, conditioned responses, Wolpe worked out a way to train a client to remain calm and relaxed in situations that formerly produced anxiety. Wolpe’s approach is elegant in its simplicity, and his method is equally straightforward.
A client is first taught to enter a state of relaxation, typically by progressive concentration on relaxing various muscle groups. Meanwhile, patient and therapist collaborate in constructing an anxiety hierarchy that consists of imagined scenes graded as to their capacity to elicit anxiety. For example, for a dog-phobic patient, a low-anxiety step might be imagining a small dog in the distance being walked on a leash by its owner. In contrast, a high- anxiety step might be imagining a large and exuberant dog run- ning toward the patient. Therapy sessions consist of the patient’s repeatedly imagining, under conditions of deep relaxation, the scenes in the hierarchy, beginning with low-anxiety images and gradually working toward those in the more extreme ranges. Treatment continues until all items in the hierarchy can be imag- ined without notable discomfort, at which point the client’s real- life difficulties typically have shown substantial improvement. Imaginal procedures have some limitations, an obvious one being that not everybody is capable of vividly imagining the required scenes. In an influential early study of clients with agora- phobia, Emmelkamp and Wessels (1975) conclude that prolonged exposure   in vivo   is superior to imaginal exposure. Since then, therapists have sought to use in vivo exposure whenever practi- cal, encouraging clients to confront anxiety-provoking situations directly. As practicing clinicians, we sometimes receive requests from behavior therapists using electronic mailing lists for instruc- tions on making concoctions that look like vomit. In these cases the therapist is treating someone who has a vomiting phobia and has a need for something that looks realistic for an   in vivo   exposure. Of course,   in vivo   exposure is not possible for all stimuli. In addition, occasionally a client is so fearful that he or she cannot be induced to confront the anxiety-arousing situation directly. Imaginal procedures are therefore a vital part of the therapeutic exposure rep- ertoire. An important development in behavior therapy is the use of virtual reality to help patients overcome their fears and phobias (Rothbaum, Hodges, et al., 2000). Such approaches are obviously needed when the source of the patient’s anxiety is something that is not easily reproduced in real life, such as flying. Overall, the out- come record for exposure treatments is impressive (Barlow et al., 2007; Emmelkamp, 2004). It is also encouraging that the results from virtual reality exposure are comparable to the results obtained from in vivo exposure (Powers & Emmelkamp, 2008).  averSion TheraPy   Aversion therapy involves modifying un- desirable behavior by the old-fashioned method of punishment. Probably the most commonly used aversive stimuli today are drugs that have noxious effects, such as Antabuse, which induces nausea and vomiting when a person who has taken it ingests alcohol. In another variant, the client is instructed to wear a sub- stantial elastic band on the wrist and to “snap” it when tempta- tion arises, thus administering self-punishment. In the past, painful electric shock was commonly employed in programs that paired it with the occurrence of the undesirable behavior, a practice that certainly contributed to aversion therapy’s negative image among some segments of the public. Although aversive conditioning has been used to treat a wide range of mal- adaptive behaviors including smoking, drinking, overeating, drug dependence, gambling, sexual deviance, and bizarre psychotic behavior, interest in this approach has declined as other treatment options have become available (see Emmelkamp, 2004).  moDeling   As the name implies, in   modeling   the client learns new skills by imitating another person, such as a parent or therapist,  Exposure therapy involves confronting anxiety-provoking situations. It can be done in vivo (in real life) or in thoughts or imagination. In vivo is preferable whenever practically possible.
who performs the behavior to be acquired. A younger client may be exposed to behaviors or roles in peers who act as assistants to the therapist and then be encouraged to imitate and practice the desired new responses. For example, modeling may be used to promote the learning of simple skills such as self-feeding for a child with profound mental retardation or more complex skills such as being more effective in social situations for a shy, withdrawn adolescent. In work with children especially, effective decision making and problem solving may be modeled when the therapist “thinks out loud” about everyday choices that present themselves in the course of therapy (Kendall, 1990; Kendall & Braswell, 1985). Modeling and imitation are adjunctive aspects of various forms of behavior therapy as well as other types of therapy. For example, in an early classic work, Bandura (1964) found that live modeling of fearlessness, combined with instruction and guided exposure, was the most effective treatment for snake phobia, resulting in the elimination of phobic reactions in over 90 percent of the cases treated. The photographs taken during the treatment of spider phobia (see Chapter 6) provide a graphic example of a similar approach.  SySTemaTiC uSe of reinforCemenT   Systematic pro- grams that use reinforcement to suppress (extinguish) unwanted behavior or to elicit and maintain desired behavior have achieved notable success. Often called contingency management pro- grams, these approaches are often used in institutional settings, although this is not always the case. Suppressing problematic behavior may be as simple as removing the reinforcements that support it, provided, of course, that they can be identified. Sometimes identification is relatively easy, as in the following case. In other instances, it may require extremely careful and detailed observation and analysis for the therapist to learn what is maintaining the maladaptive behavior.  Showing Off in Class   Billy, a 6-year-old first grader, was brought to a psychological clinic by his parents because he hated school and because his teacher had told them that his showing off was disrupting the class and making him unpopular. It became apparent in observing Billy and his parents during the initial interview that both his mother and his father were noncriti- cal and approving of everything Billy did. After further assess- ment, a three-phase program of therapy was undertaken: (1) Billy’s parents were helped to discriminate between showing- off behavior and appropriate behavior on Billy’s part. (2) They were instructed to ignore Billy when he engaged in showing-off behavior while continuing to show their approval of appropriate behavior. (3) Billy’s teacher was also instructed to ignore Billy, insofar as it was feasible, when he engaged in showing-off behavior and to devote her attention at those times to children who were behaving more appropriately. Although Billy’s showing off in class increased during the first few days of this behavior therapy program, it diminished mark- edly after his parents and teacher no longer reinforced it. As his maladaptive behavior diminished, he was better accepted by his classmates. This helped reinforce more appropriate behavior pat- terns and changed Billy’s negative attitude toward school.  Billy’s was a case in which unwanted behavior was elimi- nated by eliminating its reinforcers. On other occasions, therapy is administered to establish desired behaviors that are missing. Examples of such approaches are   response shaping   and use of  token economies . In   response shaping , positive reinforcement is used to establish, by gradual approximation, a response that is actively resisted or is not initially in an individual’s behavioral repertoire. This technique has been used extensively in working with children’s behavior problems (Kazdin, 2007). For example, a child who refuses to speak in front of others (selective mutism) may be first rewarded (with praise or a more tangible treat) for making any sound. Later, only complete words, and later again only strings of words, would be rewarded.  Token eConomieS   Years ago, when behavior therapy was in its infancy, token economies based on the principles of operant conditioning were developed for use with chronic psychiatric inpatients. When they behaved appropriately on the hospital ward, patients earned tokens that they could later use to receive rewards or privileges (Paul, 1982; Paul & Lentz, 1977). Token economies have been used to establish adaptive behav- iors ranging from elementary responses such as eating and making one’s bed to the daily performance of responsible hospital jobs. In the latter instance, the   token economy   resembles the outside world, where an individual is paid for his or her work in tokens (money) that can later be exchanged for desired objects and activi- ties. Although sometimes the subject of criticism and controversy, token economies remain a relevant treatment approach for the seriously mentally ill and those with developmental disabilities (see Higgins et al., 2001; Le Blanc et al., 2000). Similar reinforcement-based methods are now being used to treat substance abuse. In one study, people being treated for cocaine dependence were rewarded with vouchers worth 25 cents if their urine tests came back negative (see Higgins, Wong, et al., 2000). Patients could then ask a staff member to purchase for them items from the community with the vouchers they had accu- mulated. Patients who received the incentive vouchers based on their abstinence from cocaine had better clinical outcomes than a comparison group of patients who also received vouchers but whose vouchers were not contingent on their abstinent behavior.  evaluaTing behavior TheraPy   Compared with some other forms of therapy, behavior therapy has some distinct advan- tages. Behavior therapy usually achieves results in a short period of time because it is generally directed to specific symptoms, leading to faster relief of a client’s distress and to lower costs. The methods to be used are also clearly delineated, and the results can be readily evaluated. Overall, the outcomes achieved with behavior therapy compare very favorably with those of other approaches (Emmelkamp, 2004; Nathan & Gorman, 2007).
As with other approaches, behavior therapy works better with certain kinds of problems than with others. Generally, the more pervasive and vaguely defined the client’s problem, the less likely behavior therapy is to be useful. For example, it appears to be only rarely employed to treat complex personality disorders, although  dialectical behavior therapy   (see  0) for patients with bor- derline personality disorder is an exception (Crits-Christoph & Barber, 2007). On the other hand, behavioral techniques remain central to the treatment of anxiety disorders (Barlow et al., 2007; Franklin & Foa, 2007). Because behavioral treatments are often quite straightforward, behavior therapy can be used with psychotic patients (Kopelowicz et al., 2007). Recent research also shows that behavior therapy is an effective treatment for the vocal and motor tics that are found in people with Tourette’s syndrome (Wilhelm et al., 2012). This is welcome news because the alternative treat- ment approach involves the use of antipsychotic medications. A recent development in the treatment of depression is a brief and structured form of therapy called   behavioral activation   (see Chapter 7). In this treatment the patient and the therapist work together to help the patient find ways to become more active and engaged with life. The patient is encouraged to engage in activities that will help improve mood and lead to better ways of coping with specific life problems. Although this sounds quite simple, it is not always that easy to accomplish. However, evidence to date suggests that this form of therapy is very beneficial for patients and can lead to enduring change (Dimidjian et al., 2011; Dobson et al., 2008).  Cognitive and Cognitive-behavioral Therapy  The early behavior therapists focused on observable behavior and regarded the inner thoughts of their clients as unimportant. However, starting in the 1970s, a number of behavior thera- pists began to reappraise the importance of “private events”— thoughts, perceptions, evaluations, and self-statements—and started to see them as processes that mediated the effects of objective stimulus conditions to determine behavior and emo- tions (Borkovec, 1985; Mahoney & Arnkoff, 1978).  Cognitive   and   cognitive-behavioral therapy   (terms for the most part used interchangeably) stem from both cognitive psychology (with its emphasis on the effects of thoughts on behavior) and behaviorism (with its rigorous methodology and performance-oriented focus). No single set of techniques defines cognitively oriented treatment approaches. However, two main themes are important: (1) the conviction that cognitive processes influence emotion, motivation, and behavior; and (2) the use of cognitive and behavior-change techniques in a pragmatic (hypothesis-testing) manner. In the following discussion, we briefly describe the rational emotive behavior therapy of Albert Ellis and then focus in more detail on the cognitive therapy approach of Aaron Beck.  raTional emoTive behavior TheraPy   The first form of behaviorally oriented cognitive therapy was developed by Albert Ellis and called   rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT)  (see Ellis & Dryden, 1997). REBT attempts to change a client’s maladaptive thought processes, on which maladaptive emotional responses, and thus behavior, are presumed to depend. Ellis posited that a well-functioning individual behaves ratio- nally and in tune with empirical reality. Unfortunately, however, many of us have learned unrealistic beliefs and perfectionistic values that cause us to expect too much of ourselves, leading us to behave irrationally and then to feel that we are worthless failures. For example, a person may continually think, “I should be able to win everyone’s love and approval” or “I should be thoroughly adequate and competent in everything I do.” Such unrealistic assumptions and self-demands inevitably spell problems. The task of REBT is to restructure an individual’s belief sys- tem and self-evaluation, especially with respect to the irrational “shoulds,” “oughts,” and “musts” that are preventing the indi- vidual from having a more positive sense of self-worth and an emotionally satisfying, fulfilling life. Several methods are used. One method is to dispute a person’s false beliefs through rational confrontation (“Why should your failure to get the promotion you wanted mean that you are worthless?”). REBT therapists also use behaviorally oriented techniques. For example, homework assignments might be given to encour- age clients to have new experiences and to break negative chains of behavior. Although the techniques differ dramatically, the phi- losophy underlying REBT has something in common with that underlying humanistic therapy (discussed later) because both take a clear stand on personal worth and human values. Rational emo- tive behavior therapy aims to increase an individual’s feelings of self-worth and clear the way for self-actualization by removing the false beliefs that have been stumbling blocks to personal growth.  beCk’S CogniTive TheraPy   Beck’s cognitive therapy ap- proach was originally developed for the treatment of depression and later for anxiety disorders. Now, however, this form of  According to the cognitive model, how we think about situations is closely linked to our emotional responses to them. If this young man is having automatic thoughts such as, “I’ll never get to play. I’m such a loser,” he is likely to be more emotionally distressed about waiting on the sideline than if he has a thought such as, “There’s a lot I can learn from watching how this game is going.”
treatment is used for a broad range of conditions, including eat- ing disorders and obesity, personality disorders, substance abuse, and even schizophrenia (Beck, 2005; Beck & Rector, 2005; Hollon & Beck, 2004). The cognitive model is basically an information-processing model of psychopathology. A fundamental assumption of the cognitive model is that problems result from biased processing of external events or internal stimuli. These bi- ases distort the way that a person makes sense of the experiences that she or he has in the world, leading to cognitive errors. But why do people make cognitive errors at all? According to Beck (2005), underlying these biases is a relatively stable set of cognitive structures or schemas that contain dysfunctional beliefs. When these schemas become activated (by external or internal triggers), they bias how people process information. In the case of depression, people become inclined to make negatively biased interpretations of themselves, their world, and their future. In the initial phase of cognitive therapy, clients are made aware of the connection between their patterns of thinking and their emotional responses. They are first taught simply to iden- tify their own automatic thoughts (such as, “This event is a total disaster”) and to keep records of their thought content and their emotional reactions (see Wright et al., 2006). With the therapist’s help, they then identify the logical errors in their thinking and learn to challenge the validity of these automatic thoughts. The errors in the logic behind their thinking lead them (1) to perceive the world selectively as harmful while ignoring evidence to the contrary; (2) to overgeneralize on the basis of limited examples— for example, seeing themselves as totally worthless because they were laid off from work; (3) to magnify the significance of unde- sirable events—for example, seeing the job loss as the end of the world for them; and (4) to engage in absolutistic thinking—for example, exaggerating the importance of someone’s mildly critical comment and perceiving it as proof of their instant descent from goodness to worthlessness. In the case study below, the therapist describes some of these errors in thinking to a depressed patient.  Cognitive Therapy  therapist :   You have described many instances today where your interpretations led to particular feelings. You remember when you were crying a little while ago and I asked you what was going through your mind? You told me that you thought that I considered you pathetic and that I wouldn’t want to see you for therapy. I said you were reading my mind and putting negative thoughts in my mind that were not, in fact, correct. You were making an arbitrary inference, or jumping to conclusions without evidence. This is what often happens when one is depressed. One tends to put the most negative interpretations on things, even sometimes when the evi- dence is contrary, and this makes one even more depressed. Do you recognize what I mean?  patient : You mean even my thoughts are wrong?  therapist : No, not your thoughts in general, and I am not talk- ing about right and wrong. As I was explaining before, interpretations are not facts. They can be more or less accu- rate, but they cannot be right or wrong. What I mean is that some of your interpretations, in particular those relating to yourself, are biased negatively. The thoughts you attributed to me could have been accurate. But there were also many other conclusions you could have reached that might have been less depressing for you, in that they would reflect less badly on you. For example, you could have thought that since I was spending time with you, that meant I was inter- ested and that I wanted to try and help. If this had been your conclusion, how do you think that you would have felt? Do you think that you would have felt like crying?  patient : Well, I guess I might have felt less depressed, more hopeful.  therapist : Good. That’s the point I was trying to make. We feel what we think. Unfortunately, these biased interpretations tend to occur automatically. They just pop into one’s head and one believes them. What you and I will do in therapy is to try and catch these thoughts and examine them. Together we will look at the evidence and correct the biases to make the thoughts more realistic. Does this sound all right with you?  patient : Yes. Source: From I-M. Blackburn and K. M. Davidson. (1990). Cognitive therapy for depression and anxiety: A practitioner’s guide (pp. 106–7). Copyright © 1995 Blackwell Science.  Much of the content of the therapy sessions and homework assignments is analogous to experiments in which a therapist and a client apply learning principles to alter the client’s biased and dysfunctional cognitions and continuously evaluate the effects that these changes have on subsequent thoughts, feel- ings, and overt behavior. It is important to note, however, that in Beck’s cognitive therapy, clients do not change their beliefs by debate and confrontation as is common in REBT. Rather, they are encouraged to gather information about themselves. For example, a young man who believes that he will be rejected by any attractive woman he approaches would be led to a searching analysis of the reasons why he holds this belief. The client might then be assigned the task of “testing” this dysfunctional “hypoth- esis” by actually approaching seemingly appropriate women whom he admires. The results of the “test” would then be dis- cussed with the cognitive therapist, and any cognitive “errors” that may have interfered with a skillful performance would be identified and corrected. In addition, the client is encouraged to discover the faulty assumptions or dysfunctional schemas that may be leading to problem behaviors and self-defeating tendencies (Young et al., 2008). These generally become evident over the course of therapy as the client and the therapist examine the themes of the client’s automatic thoughts. Because these dysfunctional sche- mas are seen as making the person vulnerable (e.g., to depres- sion), this phase of treatment is considered essential in ensuring
resistance to relapse when the client faces stressful life events in the future. That is, if the underlying cognitive vulnerability factors are not changed, the client may show only short-term improvement and will still be subject to recurrent depression. For disorders other than depression, the general approach is quite similar. However, the nature of the patient’s automatic thoughts and underlying beliefs is obviously quite different across disorders. In panic disorder, for example, the focus is on identifying the automatic thoughts about feared bodily sensa- tions and on teaching the client to “decatastrophize” the experi- ence of panic (Craske & Barlow, 2008). In bulimia nervosa, the cognitive approach centers on the person’s overvalued ideas about body weight and shape, which are often fueled by low self- esteem and fears of being unattractive. In addition, faulty cogni- tions about which foods are “safe” and which are “dangerous” are explored (Fairburn et al., 2008; Wilson, 2005).  evaluaTing CogniTive-behavioral TheraPieS   In spite of the widespread attention that Ellis’s REBT has enjoyed, it has been less well assimilated into the mainstream than Beck’s cognitive therapy (David et al., 2005). Nonetheless, REBT is still very much alive and well. In general, this approach may be most useful in helping basically healthy people to cope better with everyday stress and perhaps in preventing them from developing full-blown anxiety or depressive disorders (Haaga & Davison, 1989, 1992). With respect to controlled research studies with carefully diagnosed clinical populations, REBT appears to be inferior to exposure-based therapies in the treatment of anxiety disorders such as agoraphobia, social phobia (Haaga & Davison, 1989, 1992), and probably obsessive-compulsive disorder (Franklin & Foa, 1998). In contrast, the efficacy of Beck’s cognitive treatment meth- ods has been well documented. Research suggests that these approaches are extremely beneficial in alleviating many differ- ent types of disorders (see Hollon & Beck, 2004). For all but the most severe cases of depression (e.g., psychotic depression), cognitive-behavioral therapy is at least comparable to drug treat- ment. It also offers long-term advantages, especially with regard to the prevention of relapse (Craighead et al., 2007). Cogni- tive therapy also produces dramatic results in the treatment of panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder (Hollon & Beck, 2004), and cognitive-behavioral therapy is now the treatment of choice for bulimia (Wilson, 2010; Wilson & Fairburn, 2007). Finally, cognitive approaches have promise in the treatment of conduct disorder in children (Kazdin, 2007), substance abuse (Beck et al., 1993), and certain personality disorders (Beck et al., 1990; Linehan, 1993). The combined use of cognitive and behavior therapy approaches is now quite routine. Some disagreement remains about whether the effects of cognitive treatments are actually the result of cognitive changes as the cognitive theorists pro- pose (Hollon & Beck, 2004; Jacobson et al., 1996). At least for depression and panic disorder, it does appear that cognitive change is the best predictor of long-term outcome, just as cogni- tive theory maintains (Hollon et al., 1990). Exactly what the “active ingredients” of cognitive treatments really are, however, remains a source of debate and research (e.g., Garratt et al., 2007; Teasdale et al., 2001).  humanistic-experiential Therapies  The humanistic-experiential therapies emerged as significant treatment approaches after World War II. In a society dominated by self-interest, mechanization, computerization, mass decep- tion, and mindless bureaucracy, proponents of the humanistic- experiential therapies see psychopathology as stemming in many cases from problems of alienation, depersonalization, loneliness, and a failure to find meaning and genuine fulfilment. Problems of this sort, it is held, are not likely to be solved either by delving into forgotten memories or by correcting specific maladaptive behaviors. The humanistic-experiential therapies are based on the assumption that people have both the freedom and the responsi- bility to control their own behavior—that they can reflect on their problems, make choices, and take positive action. Humanistic- experiential therapists feel that a client must take most of the responsibility for the direction and success of therapy, with the therapist serving merely as counselor, guide, and facilitator. Although humanistic-experiential therapies differ in their details, their central focus is always expanding a client’s “awareness.”  ClienT-CenTereD TheraPy   The   client-centered   (person- centered)   therapy   of Carl Rogers (1902–1987) focuses on the natural power of the organism to heal itself (Rogers, 1951, 1961). Rogers saw therapy as a process of removing the con- straints and restrictions that grow out of unrealistic demands that people tend to place on themselves when they believe, as a condition of self-worth, that they should not have certain kinds of feelings such as hostility. By denying that they do in fact have such feelings, they become unaware of their actual “gut” reac- tions. As they lose touch with their own genuine experience, the result is lowered integration, impaired personal relationships, and various forms of maladjustment. The primary objective of Rogerian therapy is to resolve this incongruence—to help clients become able to accept and be themselves. To this end, client-centered therapists establish a psychological climate in which clients can feel unconditionally accepted, understood, and valued as people. Within this context, the therapist employs nondirective techniques such as empathic reflecting, or restatement of the client’s descriptions of life dif- ficulties. If all goes well, clients begin to feel free, for perhaps the first time, to explore their real feelings and thoughts and to accept hates and angers and ugly feelings as parts of themselves. As their self-concept becomes more congruent with their actual experience, they become more self-accepting and more open to new experiences and new perspectives; in short, they become better-integrated people.
In contrast to most other forms of therapy, the client- centered therapist does not give answers, interpret what a client says, probe for unconscious conflicts, or even steer the client toward certain topics. Rather, he or she simply listens attentively and acceptingly to what the client wants to talk about, interrupt- ing only to restate in different words what the client is saying. Such restatements, devoid of any judgment or interpretation by the therapist, help the client to clarify further the feelings and ideas that he or she is exploring—really to look at them and acknowledge them. The following excerpt from a therapist’s sec- ond interview with a young woman will serve to illustrate these techniques of reflection and clarification.  Client-Centered Therapy  jenny :   I was thinking about how I always try to make people around me feel at ease. It’s so important for me to make things go along smoothly.  therapist : In other words, you are always trying to make other people feel better and to do all you can to keep things on an even keel and going well.  jenny : Yes. That’s right. I mean, it’s not because I am such a kind person and all I want to see is other people being happy. I think the reason I do it is probably because that has always been the role that has felt the easiest for me to play. It’s the role I played at home. I didn’t stand up for my own convictions. And now I’m at the point where I don’t really know whether I have any convictions to stand up for.  therapist : So you feel this is a role you have been playing for a long time, smoothing out frictions and avoiding saying any- thing that might be challenging in any way.  jenny : I think that’s right.  therapist : And so now you aren’t sure if you even have any genu- ine opinions or reactions of your own. Is that right?  jenny : That’s it. Or maybe I haven’t really been honest with myself and let myself even consider what I really think about things. I’ve just been playing a sort of a false role—being a people- pleaser. Whatever I felt other people needed me to be, that’s who I was. And in the process I just got lost.  Pure client-centered psychotherapy, as originally practiced, is rarely used today in North America, although it is still rela- tively popular in Europe. Motivational interviewing is a new form of therapy that is based on this empathic style.  moTivaTional inTervieWing   People tend to be ambivalent about making changes in their lives. They want to change, but they also don’t want to change.   Motivational interviewing (MI ; see Hettema, Steele, & Miller, 2005) is a brief form of ther- apy that can be delivered in one or two sessions. It was developed as a way to help people resolve their ambivalence about change and make a commitment to treatment (Miller, 1983). At its center is a supportive and empathic style of relating to the client that has its origins in the work of Carl Rogers. How- ever, MI differs from client-centered counseling because it also employs a more direct approach that explores the client’s own reasons for wanting to change. The therapist encourages this “change talk” by asking the client to discuss his or her desire, ability, reasons, and need for change. These are reflected back by the therapist, thus exposing the client to periodic summaries of his or her own motivational statements and thoughts about change. The result is that clients can develop and strengthen their commitment to change in an active, accepting, and sup- portive atmosphere. Motivational interviewing is most often used in the areas of substance abuse and addiction. When added to the begin- ning of a treatment program, it appears to benefit patients, perhaps because it facilitates patients’ staying in treatment and following the treatment plan. Hettema and colleagues’ (2005) meta-analysis of the MI literature has also shown that MI has a large effect when it is used with ethnic minorities. In one alcoholism-treatment trial, Native American participants did better if they received four sessions of MI than if they received 12 sessions of cognitive-behavior therapy or else participated in a 12-step program (Villanueva et al., 2003). Quite pos- sibly, the supportive and nonconfrontational style of MI may be more congruent with the typical and culturally sanctioned communication style of Native Americans and thus represent a culturally appropriate intervention. The collaborative and nonconfrontational style of MI may also make it acceptable to adolescents. Even a very small number of sessions of MI can promote behavior change in adolescents who use drugs and alcohol (Jensen et al., 2011).  geSTalT TheraPy   In German, the term   gestalt   means “whole,” and gestalt therapy emphasizes the unity of mind and body—placing strong emphasis on the need to integrate  Motivational interviewing is a brief intervention that helps people resolve their ambivalence about making change. It is often used in the treatment of substance abuse and addiction.
thought, feeling, and action.   Gestalt therapy   was developed by Frederick (Fritz) Perls (1969) as a means of teaching clients to recognize the bodily processes and emotions they had been blocking off from awareness. As with the client-centered and humanistic approaches, the main goal of gestalt therapy is to in- crease the individual’s self-awareness and self-acceptance. Although gestalt therapy is commonly used in a group set- ting, the emphasis is on one person at a time, with whom a therapist works intensively, trying to help identify aspects of the individual’s self or world that are not being acknowledged in awareness. The individual may be asked to act out fantasies concerning feelings and conflicts or to represent one side of a conflict while sitting in one chair and then switch chairs to take the part of the adversary. Often the therapist or other group members will ask such questions as, “What are you aware of in your body now?” and “What does it feel like in your gut when you think of that?” In Perls’s approach to therapy, a good deal of attention is also paid to dreams, but with an emphasis very different from that of classical psychoanalysis. In gestalt theory, all elements of a dream, including seemingly inconsequential, impersonal objects, are considered to be representations of unacknowledged aspects of the dreamer’s self. The therapist urges the client to suspend normal critical judgment, to “be” the object in the dream, and then to report on the experience. This is illustrated in the follow- ing case study.  Gestalt Therapy   A college professor was preoccu- pied with his academic promotion and tenure and found himself unable to experience any joy. He sought the assistance of a friend who was a gestalt therapist. She asked him to conjure up a daydream rather than a dream. The daydream that emerged spontaneously was one of skiing. The therapist asked him to be the mountain, and he began to experience how warm he was when he was at his base. As he got closer to the top, what looked so beautiful was also very cold and frozen. The therapist asked the professor to be the snow, and he experienced how hard and icy he could be near the top. But near the bottom, people ran over him easily and wore him out. When the session was finished, the professor did not feel like crying or shouting; he felt like skiing. So he went, leaving articles and books behind. In the sparkle of the snow and sun, he realized that joy in living emerges through deeds and not through words. In his rush to succeed, he had committed one of the cardinal sins against himself—the sin of not being active. Source: Adapted from Prochaska & Norcross, 2003, p. 183.  evaluaTing humaniSTiC-exPerienTial TheraPieS  Many of the humanistic-experiential concepts—the uniqueness of each individual, the importance of therapist genuineness, the satisfaction that comes from realizing one’s potential, the impor- tance of the search for meaning and fulfilment, and the human capacity for choice and self-direction—have had a major impact on our contemporary views of both human nature and the na- ture of good psychotherapy. However, humanistic-experiential therapies have been criti- cized for their lack of agreed-upon therapeutic procedures and their vagueness about what is supposed to happen between client and therapist. In response, proponents of such approaches argue against reducing people to abstractions, which can diminish their perceived worth and deny their uniqueness. Because people are so different, they argue, we should expect different techniques to be appropriate for different cases. Controlled research on the outcomes achieved by many forms of humanistic-existential therapy was lacking in the past. However, research in this area is now on the increase. There is evidence to suggest that these treatment approaches are helpful for patients with a variety of problems including depression, anx- iety, trauma, and marital difficulties (Elliot et al., 2004). And, as we have already noted, motivational interviewing is now estab- lished as an effective method for promoting behavior change in people with substance abuse problems (Ball et al., 2007; Jensen et al., 2011).  Psychodynamic Therapies  Psychodynamic therapy   is a broad treatment approach that focuses on individual personality dynamics, usually from a psychoanalytic or some psychoanalytically derived perspec- tive. Psychoanalytic therapy is the oldest form of psychological therapy and began with Sigmund Freud. The therapy is mainly practiced in two basic forms: classical psychoanalysis and psy- choanalytically oriented psychotherapy. As developed by Freud and his immediate followers, classical psychoanalysis is an inten- sive (at least three sessions per week), long-term procedure for uncovering repressed memories, thoughts, fears, and conflicts presumably stemming from problems in early psychosexual development—and helping individuals come to terms with them in light of the realities of adult life. For example, excessive order- liness and a grim and humorless focus on rigorous self-control would probably be viewed as deriving from difficulties in early toilet training. In psychoanalytically oriented psychotherapy, the treatment and the ideas guiding it may depart substantially from the prin- ciples and procedures laid out by orthodox Freudian theory, yet the therapy is still loosely based on psychoanalytic concepts. For example, many psychoanalytically oriented therapists schedule less frequent sessions (e.g., once per week) and sit face-to-face with the client instead of having the latter recline on a couch with the analyst out of sight behind him or her. Likewise, the relatively passive stance of the analyst (primarily listening to the client’s “free associations” and rarely offering “interpretations”) is replaced with an active conversational style in which the thera- pist attempts to clarify distortions and gaps in the client’s con- struction of the origins and consequences of his or her problems, thus challenging client “defenses” as they present themselves.
It is widely believed that this more direct approach significantly shortens total treatment time. We will first examine Freud’s orig- inal treatment methods, in part because of their historical signifi- cance and enormous influence; we will then look briefly at some of the contemporary modifications of psychodynamic therapy, which for the most part focus on interpersonal processes. Before we do so, however, let’s consider the case of Karen.  Psychodynamic Therapy   Karen was about to be ter- minated from her nursing program if her problems were not resolved. She had always been a competent student who seemed to get along well with peers and patients. Now, since the beginning of her rotation on 3 South, a surgical ward, she was plagued by headaches and dizzy spells. Of more serious con- sequence were the two medical errors she had made when dis- pensing medications to patients. She realized that these errors could have proved fatal, and she was as concerned as her nurs- ing faculty about why such problems had begun in this final year of her education. Karen knew she had many negative feelings toward the head nurse on 3 South, but she did not believe these feelings could account for her current dilemma. She entered psychotherapy. After a few weeks of psychotherapy, the therapist realized that one of Karen’s important conflicts revolved around the death of her father when she was 12 years old. Karen had just gone to live with her father after being with her mother for 7 years. She remembered how upset she was when her father had a heart attack and had to be rushed to the hospital. For a while it looked as though her father was going to pull through, and Karen began enjoying her daily visits to see him. During one of these visits, her father clutched his chest in obvious pain and told Karen to get a nurse. She remembered how helpless she felt when she could not find a nurse, although she did not recall why this was so dif- ficult. Her search seemed endless, and by the time she finally found a nurse, her father was dead. The therapist asked Karen the name of the ward on which her father had died. She paused and thought, and then she blurted out, “3 South.” She cried at length as she told how confused she was and how angry she felt toward the nurses on the ward for not being more readily available, although she thought they might have been involved with another emergency. After weeping and shaking and expressing her resentment, Karen felt calm and relaxed for the first time in months. Her symptoms disappeared, and her problems in the nursing program were relieved. Source: Adapted from Prochaska & Norcross, 2003, p. 28.  freuDian PSyChoanalySiS   Psychoanalysis is a system of therapy that evolved over a period of years during Freud’s long career. Psychoanalysis is not easy to describe, and the problem is complicated by the fact that many people have inaccurate con- ceptions of it based on cartoons and other forms of caricature. The best way to begin our discussion is to describe the four basic techniques of this form of therapy: (1) free association, (2) analysis of dreams, (3) analysis of resistance, and (4) analysis of transfer- ence. Then we will note some of the most important changes that have taken place in psychodynamic therapy since Freud’s time.  free association   The basic rule of   free association   (see Chapter 2) is that an individual must say whatever comes into her or his mind regardless of how personal, painful, or seemingly irrelevant it may be. Usually a client lies in a relaxed position on a couch and gives a running account of all the thoughts, feelings, and desires that come to mind as one idea leads to another. The therapist normally takes a position behind the client so as not to disrupt the free flow of associations in any way. Although such a running account of whatever comes into one’s mind may seem random, Freud did not view it as such; rather, he believed that associations are determined just like other events. The purpose of free association is to explore thor- oughly the contents of the preconscious—that part of the mind considered subject to conscious attention but largely ignored. Analytic interpretation involves a therapist’s tying together a client’s often disconnected ideas, beliefs, and actions into a meaningful explanation to help the client gain insight into the relationship between his or her maladaptive behavior and the repressed (unconscious) events and fantasies that drive it.  analysis of Dreams   Another important, related procedure for uncovering unconscious material is the analysis of dreams. When a person is asleep, repressive defenses are said to be  In classical (Freudian) psychoanalysis the technique of free association may be used to explore the contents of the preconscious.
lowered, and forbidden desires and feelings may find an outlet in dreams. For this reason, dreams have been referred to as the “royal road to the unconscious.” Some motives, however, are so unacceptable to an individual that even in dreams they are not revealed openly but are expressed in disguised or symbolic form. Thus a dream has two kinds of content: (1)   manifest content , which is the dream as it appears to the dreamer, and (2)   latent content , which consists of the actual motives that are seeking expression but are so painful or unacceptable that they are disguised. It is a therapist’s task, in conjunction with the associations of the patient, to uncover these disguised meanings by studying the images that appear in the manifest content of a client’s dream and in the client’s associations to them. For example, a client’s dream of being engulfed in a tidal wave may be interpreted by a therapist as indicating that the client feels in danger of being overwhelmed by inadequately repressed fears or hostilities.  analysis of resistance   During the process of free asso- ciation or of associating to dreams, an individual may evidence  resistance —an unwillingness or inability to talk about certain thoughts, motives, or experiences. For example, a client may be talking about an important childhood experience and then sud- denly switch topics, perhaps stating, “It really isn’t that impor- tant” or “It is too absurd to discuss.” Resistance may also be evidenced by the client’s giving a too-glib interpretation of some association, or coming late to an appointment, or even “forget- ting” an appointment altogether. Because resistance prevents painful and threatening material from entering awareness, its sources must be sought if an individual is to face the problem and learn to deal with it in a realistic manner (Horner, 2005).  analysis of Transference   As client and therapist interact, the relationship between them may become complex and emo- tionally involved. Often people carry over, and unconsciously apply to their therapist, attitudes and feelings that they had in their relations with a parent or other person close to them in the past, a process known as   transference . Thus clients may react to their analyst as they did to that earlier person and feel the same love, hostility, or rejection that they felt long ago. If the analyst is operating according to the prescribed role of maintaining an impersonal stance of detached attention, the often affect-laden reactions of the client can be interpreted, it is held, as a type of projection—inappropriate to the present situation yet highly revealing of central issues in the client’s life. For example, should the client vehemently (but inaccurately) condemn the therapist for a lack of caring and attention to the client’s needs, this would be seen as a “transference” to the therapist of attitudes acquired (possibly on valid grounds) in childhood interactions with par- ents or other key individuals. In helping the client to understand and acknowledge the transference relationship, a therapist may provide the client with insight into the meaning of his or her reactions to others. In doing so, the therapist may also introduce a corrective emotional experience by refusing to engage the person on the basis of his or her unwarranted assumptions about the nature of the thera- peutic relationship. If the client expects rejection and criticism, for example, the therapist is careful to maintain a neutral man- ner. Or contrarily, the therapist may express positive emotions at a point where the client feels particularly vulnerable, thereby encouraging the client to reframe and rethink her or his view of the situation. In this way it may be possible for the client to recognize these assumptions and to “work through” the conflict in feelings about the real parent or perhaps to overcome feelings of hostility and self-devaluation that stem from the earlier paren- tal rejection. In essence, the negative effects of an undesirable early relationship are counteracted by working through a similar emotional conflict with the therapist in a therapeutic setting. A person’s reliving of a pathogenic past relationship in a sense re- creates the neurosis in real life, and therefore this experience is often referred to as a   transference neurosis . It is not possible here to consider at length the complexities of transference relationships, but a client’s attitudes toward his or her therapist usually do not follow such simple patterns as our examples suggest. Often the client is ambivalent—distrusting the therapist and feeling hostile toward him or her as a symbol of authority, but at the same time seeking acceptance and love. In addition, the problems of transference are not confined to the cli- ent, for the therapist may also have a mixture of feelings toward the client. This   countertransference , wherein the therapist reacts in accord with the client’s transferred attributions rather than objectively, must be recognized and handled properly by the ther- apist. For this reason, it is considered important that therapists have a thorough understanding of their own motives, conflicts, and “weak spots”; in fact, all psychoanalysts undergo psychoanal- ysis themselves before they begin independent practice. The resolution of the transference neurosis is said to be the key element in effecting a psychoanalytic “cure.” Such resolu- tion can occur only if an analyst successfully avoids the pitfalls of countertransference. That is, the analyst needs to keep track of his or her own transference or reaction to a client’s behavior. Failure to do so risks merely repeating, in the therapy relation- ship, the typical relationship difficulties characterizing the client’s adult life. Analysis of transference and the phenomenon of countertransference are also part of most psychodynamic derivatives of classical psychoanalysis, to which we now turn.  Psychodynamic Therapy Since freud   The original ver- sion of psychoanalysis is practiced only rarely today. Arduous and costly in time, money, and emotional commitment, it may take several years before all major issues in the client’s life have been satisfactorily resolved. In light of these heavy demands, psychoanalytic or psychodynamic therapists have worked out modifications in procedure designed to shorten the time and expense required. A good review of some of these approaches can be found in Prochaska and Norcross (2003).
object relations, attachment-based approaches, and Self-Psychology   The most extensive revisions of classical psychoanalytic theory undertaken within recent decades have been related to the object-relations perspective (in psychoana- lytic jargon, “objects” are other people) and, to a lesser extent, the attachment and self-psychology perspectives (see Prochaska & Norcross, 2003). Whether or not psychotherapy investiga- tors and clinicians use the term   object relations   (or   attachment   or  self-psychology ) to denote their approach, increasing numbers of them describe procedures that focus on interpersonal relation- ship issues, particularly as they play themselves out in the client– therapist relationship. Interpersonally oriented psychodynamic therapists vary considerably in their time focus: whether they concentrate on remote events of the past, on current interpersonal situations and impasses (including those of the therapy itself), or on some balance of the two. Most seek to expose, bring to awareness, and modify the effects of the remote developmental sources of the difficulties the client is currently experiencing. These thera- pies generally retain, then, the classical psychoanalytic goal of understanding the present in terms of the past. What they ignore are the psychoanalytic notions of staged libidinal energy transformations and of entirely internal (and impersonal) drives that are channeled into psychopathological symptom formation.  evaluaTing PSyChoDynamiC TheraPieS   The practice of classical psychoanalysis is routinely criticized by outsiders for being relatively time consuming and expensive; for being based on a questionable, stultified, and sometimes cult-like approach to human nature; for neglecting a client’s immediate problems in the search for unconscious conflicts in the remote past; and for there being no adequate proof of its general effectiveness. Concerning this, we note that there have been no rigorous, controlled outcome studies of classical psychoanalysis. This is understandable, given the intensive and long-term nature of the treatment and the methodological difficulties inherent in test- ing such an approach. Nonetheless, there are some hints that this treatment approach has some value (Gabbard et al., 2002). Psychoanalysts also argue that manualized treatments unduly limit treatment for a disorder. They note that simply because a treatment cannot be standardized does not mean that it is invalid or unhelpful. Whether the clinical benefits justify the time and expense of psychoanalysis, however, remains uncertain. In contrast, there is much more research on some of the newer psychodynamically oriented approaches. There are signs that psychodynamic approaches may be helpful in the treatment of depression, panic disorder, PTSD, and substance abuse dis- orders (Gibbons et al., 2008). Recent research also supports the idea that increases in insight (“insight” is a key construct in psy- chodynamic theory and involves cognitive and emotional under- standing of inner conflicts) must occur before there is long-term clinical change (Johansson et al., 2010). Psychoanalytically oriented treatments are also showing promise in the treatment of borderline personality disorder. One example is   transference-focused psychotherapy , or TFP. Developed by Kernberg and colleagues, this treatment approach uses such techniques as clarification, confrontation, and interpretation to help the patient understand and correct the distortions that occur in his or her perception of other people, including the therapist. In a clinical trial, patients with borderline personal- ity disorder who received TFP did as well as those who were assigned to receive dialectical behavior therapy (Clarkin et al., 2007). A recent meta-analysis provides further support for the idea that long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy (50 sessions or more) may be more beneficial than less intensive forms of treatment for patients with complex mental disorders (Leichsenring & Rabung, 2011). Findings such as these are cre- ating renewed interest in psychodynamic forms of psychotherapy and energizing the field of treatment research.  Couple and family Therapy  Many problems that therapists deal with concern distressed relationships. A common example is couple or marital distress. Here, the maladaptive behavior exists between the partners in the relationship. Extending the focus even further, a family systems approach reflects the assumption that the within-family behavior of any particular family member is subject to the influence of the behaviors and communication patterns of other family members. It is, in other words, the product of a “system” that may be ame- nable to both understanding and change. Addressing problems deriving from the in-place system thus requires therapeutic tech- niques that focus on relationships as much as, or more than, on individuals.  CouPle TheraPy   Relationship problems are a major cause of emotional distress. The large numbers of couples seeking help with troubled relationships have made couple counseling a growing field of therapy. Typically the couple is seen together. Improving communication skills and developing more adaptive problem-solving styles are both major foci of clinical attention. Although it is quite routine at the start of therapy for each part- ner secretly to harbor the idea that only the other will have to do the changing, it is nearly always necessary for both partners to alter their reactions to the other. For many years the gold standard of   couple therapy   has been  traditional behavioral couple therapy (TBCT ; see Christensen et al., 2007). TBCT is based on a social-learning model and views marital satisfaction and marital distress in terms of reinforce- ment. The treatment is usually short term (10 to 26 sessions) and is guided by a manual. The goal of TBCT is to increase caring behaviors in the relationship and to teach partners to resolve their conflicts in a more constructive way through training in commu- nication skills and adaptive problem solving. Traditional behavioral couple therapy is an empirically supported treatment for couple distress (Snyder et al., 2006).
Early research established that two-thirds of couples tend to do well and to show improvement in relationship satisfaction (Jacob- son et al., 1987). However, it rapidly became apparent that this form of treatment does not work for all couples (Jacobson & Addis, 1993). Moreover, even among couples who do show an improvement in relationship satisfaction, the improvement is not always maintained over time (Jacobson et al., 1987). These limitations of TBCT led researchers to conclude that a change-focused treatment approach was not appropriate for all couples. This created the impetus for the development of   inte- grative behavioral couple therapy (IBCT ; see Jacobson et al., 2000; Wheeler et al., 2001). Instead of emphasizing change (which sometimes has the paradoxical effect of making people not want to change), IBCT focuses on acceptance and includes strategies that help each member of the couple come to terms with and accept some of the limitations of his or her partner. Of course, change is not forbidden. Rather, within IBCT, accep- tance strategies are integrated with change strategies to provide a form of therapy that is more tailored to individual characteris- tics, relationship “themes” (long-standing patterns of conflicts), and the needs of the couple. Although IBCT is a relative newcomer in the couple therapy field, the preliminary findings are quite promising. In one study, improvement rates were 80 percent in the couples treated with IBCT versus 64 percent in couples receiving TBCT (Jacobson et al., 2000). In another, larger study, 70 percent of couples who received IBCT showed clear improvement in their relationship compared with 61 percent of couples receiving TBCT (see Chris- tensen et al., 2007). Although these differences are not statistically different from each, other data show that couples who stay together after receiving IBCT are significantly happier than couples who stay together following treatment with TBCT (Atkins et al., 2005).  family TheraPy   Therapy for a family obviously overlaps with couple and marital therapy but has somewhat differ- ent roots. Couple therapy developed in response to the large number of clients who came seeking help for relationship problems.   Family therapy   began with the finding that many people who had shown marked clinical improvement after in- dividual treatment—often in institutional settings—had a re- lapse when they returned home. As you have already learned, family-based treatment approaches designed to reduce high levels of criticism and family tension have been successful in reducing relapse rates in patients with schizophrenia and mood disorders (Miklowitz & Craighead, 2007; Pfammatter et al., 2006). Another approach to resolving family disturbances is called  structural family therapy   (Minuchin, 1974). This approach, which is based on systems theory, holds that if the family context can be changed, then the individual members will have altered experiences in the family and will behave differently in accor- dance with the changed requirements of the new family context. Thus an important goal of structural family therapy is chang- ing the organization of the family in such a way that the family members will behave more supportively and less pathogenically toward each other. Structural family therapy is focused on present interactions and requires an active but not directive approach on the part of a therapist. Initially, the therapist gathers information about the family—a structural map of the typical family interaction patterns—by acting like one of the family members and par- ticipating in the family interactions as an insider. In this way, the therapist discovers whether the family system has rigid or flexible boundaries, who dominates the power structure, who gets blamed when things go wrong, and so on. Armed with this understanding, the therapist then operates as an agent for altering the interaction among the members, which often has transactional characteristics of enmeshment (overinvolvement), overprotectiveness, rigidity, and poor conflict resolution skills. The “identified client” is often found to play an important role in the family’s mode of conflict avoidance. As discussed in Chapter 9, structural family therapy has quite a good record of success in the treatment of anorexia nervosa.  eclecticism and integration  The various “schools” of psychotherapy that we have just described once stood more in opposition to one another than they do now. Today, clinical practice is characterized by a relax- ation of boundaries and a willingness on the part of therapists to explore differing ways of approaching clinical problems (see Castonguay et al., 2003, for a discussion), a process sometimes called   multimodal therapy   (Lazarus, 1997). When asked what their orientation is, most psychotherapists today reply “eclectic,” which usually means that they try to borrow and combine con- cepts and techniques from various schools, depending on what seems best for the individual case. This inclusiveness extends to efforts to combine biological and psychosocial approaches as well as individual and family therapies.  Couple therapists try to help couples improve their communication skills and develop more adaptive ways of solving their problems.
One example of an eclectic form of therapy is   inter- personal psychotherapy   (see also Chapter 7). Developed by Klerman and colleagues (1984) as a treatment for depression, IPT focuses on current relationships in the patient’s life and has the goals of reducing symptoms and improving function- ing. Interpersonal therapy was based on the interpersonal the- ory of Harry Stack Sullivan as well as on Bowlby’s attachment theory. Its central idea is that all of us, at all times, involun- tarily invoke schemas acquired from our earliest interactions with others, such as our parents, in interpreting what is going on in our current relationships. Although it is sometimes considered to be a form of psychodynamic psychotherapy, IPT uses techniques from several other treatment approaches. It is also focused and time limited. In addition, the emphasis in treatment is on the present, not the past (see Bleiberg & Markowitz, 2008). IPT has demonstrable value in the treatment of depression (de Mello et al., 2005). It has also been adapted for other disor- ders including bulimia nervosa (Fairburn, Jones, et al., 1993), anxiety disorders (Stangier et al., 2011), and borderline personal- ity disorder (Markowitz et al., 2006).  in review  Describe the different techniques that can be used to provide anxious patients with exposure to the stimuli they fear. In what ways are REBT and cognitive therapy similar? In what ways are they different? Explain the concepts of transference and countertransference. What special difficulties do clinicians face when they work with couples? How have techniques of marital therapy evolved over recent years?  Sociocultural Perspectives  The criticism has been raised—from both inside and outside the mental health professions—that psychotherapy can be viewed as an attempt to get people adjusted to a “sick” society rather than to encourage them to work toward its improve- ment. As a consequence, psychotherapy has often been consid- ered the guardian of the status quo. This issue is perhaps easier for us to place in perspective by looking at other cultures. For example, there had been frequent allegations that psychiatry was used as a means of political control in the former Soviet Union, an abuse that was eventually officially acknowledged (see   Schizophrenia Bulletin , 1990, vol. 16, no. 4). Although few would claim that psychiatry in most industrialized societies is used to gain control over social critics, there is nevertheless the possibility that therapists in some ways play the role of “gate- keepers” of social values. Such charges, of course, bring us back to the question we raised in  : What do we mean by “abnormal”? That question can be answered only in the light of our values.  Social values and Psychotherapy  In a broader perspective, there is the complex and controversial issue of the role of values in science. Psychotherapy is not, or at least should not be, a system of ethics; it is a set of tools to be used at the discretion of a therapist in pursuit of a client’s welfare. Thus mental health professionals are confronted with the same kinds of questions that confront scientists in general: Should a physical scientist who helps develop weapons of mass destruction be morally concerned about how they are used? Sim- ilarly, should a psychologist or behavioral scientist who develops powerful techniques to influence or control how people behave be concerned about how those techniques are used? Many psychologists and other scientists try to sidestep this issue by insisting that science is value free—that it is concerned only with gathering facts, not with how the facts are applied. Each time therapists decide that one behavior should be elimi- nated or substituted for another, however, they are making a value judgment. For example, is a therapist to assume that the depression of a young mother who is abused by an alcoholic husband is an internally based disorder requiring “treatment,” as once would have been the routine interpretation? Or does the therapist have a larger responsibility to look beyond individual pathology and confront the abnormality of the marital relation- ship? Therapy takes place in a context that involves the values of the therapist, the client, and the society in which they live. There are strong pressures on a therapist—from parents, schools, courts, and other social institutions—to help people adjust to the world as it is. At the same time, there are many counterpres- sures, particularly from young people who are seeking support in their (sometimes overdone) attempts to become authentic people rather than blind conformists. The dilemma in which contemporary therapists may find themselves is illustrated by the following case study.  Who Needs Therapy?   A 15-year-old high school sophomore is sent to a therapist because her parents have discovered that she has been having sex with her boyfriend. The girl tells the therapist that she feels no guilt or remorse over her behavior even though her parents strongly disap- prove. In addition, she reports that she is quite aware of the danger of becoming pregnant and is careful to take contra- ceptive measures.  What is the role of the therapist here? And what is the goal of treatment? Should the girl be encouraged to conform to her par- ents’ expectations and postpone sexual activity until she is older and more mature? Or should the parents be helped to adjust to the pattern of sexual behavior their daughter has chosen? As we noted earlier, it is not unusual for an individual to be referred for psychological treatment because her or his behavior, though not particularly destructive or disturbing, has caused concern among family members, who want the therapist to “fix” her or him.
Psychotherapy and Cultural Diversity  As we have seen, the establishment and maintenance of an effec- tive psychotherapeutic “working alliance” between client and therapist is generally regarded as a crucial and indispensable ele- ment in determining the success of the outcome. What does this mean for a client whose background is considerably different from that of the therapist? As yet, there is little or no solid evidence that psychothera- peutic outcomes are diminished when client and therapist dif- fer in race or ethnicity (Beutler et al., 2004; Sue et al., 1994). However, members of minority groups are seriously underrepre- sented in treatment research studies, and this makes it difficult to fully assess their needs and outcomes (Miranda et al., 2005; Nagayama Hall, 2001). Moreover, racial and ethnic minorities are clearly underserved by the mental health system (Snowden & Yamada, 2005; U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser- vices, 2001). However, the factors that are behind these dispari- ties are complex and not well understood. Many minorities are economically disadvantaged and simply do not have the health insurance they need to seek treatment. It is also difficult for patients to find the kind of therapists they want. In general, minority patients tend to prefer ethnically similar therapists over European American therapists. Mexican Americans state a strong preference for therapists who share their ethnic back- ground and express the view that such therapists are more “cred- ible” than Anglo therapists would be (Lopez et al., 1991; Ponce & Atkinson, 1989). However, finding an ethnically matched therapist may present difficulties. In one survey, for example, only 2 percent of psychiatrists, 2 percent of psychologists, and 4 percent of social workers said they were African Americans (Holzer et al., 1998). The number of mental health professionals who are repre- sentative of other minority groups is no better (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2001). The lack of trained thera- pists familiar with the issues important to different ethnic groups is a serious drawback, given the unique problems often associated with certain groups. This is illustrated in the following case, which concerns a Southeast Asian refugee woman in her mid-40s who was relocated to the United States.  A Khmer Woman   “I lost my husband, I lost my country, I lost every property/fortune we owned. And coming over here, I can’t learn to speak English and the way of life here is different; my mother and oldest son are very sick: I feel crippled, I can do nothing. I can’t control what’s going on. I don’t know what I’m going to do once my public assistance expires. I may feel safe in a way—there is no war here, no Communist to kill or torture you— but deep down inside me, I still don’t feel safe or secure. I get scared. I get scared so easily.” (From Rumbaut, 1985, p. 475.)  When specialized, culturally adapted interventions are made available in community settings, minority clients are less likely to drop out of treatment and often do well (Gonzales-Castro et al., 2010; Snowden & Yamada, 2005). However, such programs are still lacking in many communities. Also lacking are research investigations designed to understand how culture and ethnic- ity affect a person’s ability to access and receive psychiatric and psychological treatments. Nonetheless, there are encouraging developments. For example, Weisman and colleagues are devel- oping culturally informed treatments for the families of patients with schizophrenia (Weisman et al., 2006). This approach con- siders the role of family cohesiveness as well as spirituality and religion in the therapy process. Researchers are also developing culturally informed psychotherapy for Hispanic patients with major depression (Markowitz et al., 2009), as well as for African American women who are suicidal and in abusive relationships (Kaslow et al., 2010).  in review  Can psychotherapy ever be value free? Why or why not? What special issues do racial and ethnic minorities face when they seek therapy?  Biological Approaches to Treatment  The field of psychopharmacology is characterized by rapid and exciting progress. Clinical breakthroughs are occurring on a reg- ular basis, and there is now real hope for patients previously con- sidered to be beyond help. In the following sections we discuss some of the major classes of medications that are now routinely used to help patients with a variety of mental disorders, as well as some additional treatment approaches (such as electroconvulsive therapy) that are less widely used but highly effective, especially for patients who fail to show a good clinical response to other treatments. These drugs are sometimes referred to as psychoactive (liter- ally, “mind-altering”) medications, indicating that their major effects are on the brain. As we examine these medications, it is important to remember that people differ in how rapidly they metabolize drugs—that is, in how quickly their bodies break down the drugs once ingested. For example, many African Americans metabolize antidepressant and antipsychotic medi- cations more slowly than whites do. What this means is that African Americans sometimes show a more rapid and greater response to these medications but also experience more side effects (see U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2001, p. 67). Determining the correct dosage is critical because too little of a drug can be ineffective; on the other hand, too much medication can cause toxicity that may be life-threatening, depending on the individual and the medication concerned.  antipsychotic Drugs  As their name suggests,   antipsychotic drugs   (also called neurolep- tics) are used to treat psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia and psychotic mood disorders. You have already read about
these medications in  3. The key therapeutic benefit of antipsychotics derives from their ability to alleviate or reduce the intensity of delusions and hallucinations. They do this by blocking dopamine receptors. Table 16.1 lists some of the more commonly used neuroleptic drugs as well as information about typical dose ranges. Studies have found that approximately 60 percent of patients with schizophrenia who are treated with traditional antipsychotic medications have a resolution of their positive symptoms within 6 weeks, compared to only about 20 percent of those treated with placebo (see Sharif et al., 2007). These drugs are also useful in treating other disorders with psychotic symptoms such as mania, psychotic depression, and schizoaf- fective disorder, and they are occasionally used to treat transient psychotic symptoms when these occur in people with borderline personality disorder and schizotypal personality disorder (Koe- nigsberg et al., 2007). Finally, antipsychotic medications are sometimes used to treat the delusions, hallucinations, paranoia, and agitation that can occur with Alzheimer’s disease. How- ever, antipsychotic medications pose great risks to patients with dementia because they are associated with increased rates of death (Sultzer et al., 2008). Because of this, there is now a “black box warning” about using these medications with dementia patients. Antipsychotic medications are usually administered daily by mouth. However, some patients are not able to remember to take their medications each day. In such cases, depot neu- roleptics can be very helpful. These are neuroleptics that can be administered in a long-acting, injectable form. The clini- cal benefits of one injection can last for up to 4 weeks, which makes depot neuroleptics very valuable for patients who need medication but are unwilling or unable to take drugs every day. Research suggests that patients with schizophrenia who take depot medications do better than those who use oral compounds (Tiihonen et al., 2011). One very problematic side effect that can result from treat- ment with conventional antipsychotic medications such as chlorpromazine is   tardive dyskinesia   (see  3). Tar- dive (from   tardy ) dyskinesia is a movement abnormality that is a delayed result of taking antipsychotic medications. Because movement-related side effects are a little less common with atyp- ical antipsychotic medications such as clozapine (Clozaril) and olanzapine (Zyprexa), these medications are often preferred in the clinical management of schizophrenia. Clozapine also seems to be especially beneficial for psychotic patients at high risk of suicide (Meltzer et al., 2003). Even the atypical neuroleptics have side effects, however. Weight gain and diabetes are a major source of clinical concern (Sernyak et al., 2002). You may recall that an even more serious side effect of clozapine is a potentially life-threatening drop in white blood cell count called agranulocytosis, which occurs in 1 percent of patients (Sharif et al., 2007). Accordingly, patients must have their blood tested every week for the first 6 months of treatment and then every 2 weeks thereafter for as long as they are on the medication. Because of this, clozapine is best regarded as a medication to consider after other medications (e.g., some of the other atypical antipsychotic medications) have proved ineffective. Current thinking is that the atypical anti- psychotics described above (with the exception of clozapine) are the first-choice treatments for psychosis and that clozapine and conventional antipsychotics (e.g., Haldol) are best considered as second-line therapies.  antidepressant Drugs  Antidepressants are the most commonly prescribed psychiatric medications. More than 90 percent of patients being treated for depressive disorders will be given these medications (Olfson & Marcus, 2010).  SeleCTive SeroTonin reuPTake inhibiTorS   As is the case for antipsychotic medications, the drugs that were discov- ered first (so-called classical antidepressants such as monoamine oxidase [MAO] inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants [TCAs]) have now been replaced in routine clinical practice by “second- generation” treatments such as the SSRIs. In 1988 fluoxetine (Prozac) became the first SSRI to be released in the United States. Its pharmacological cousins include sertraline (Zoloft) and paroxetine (Paxil). More recent additions to the SSRI fam- ily are fluvoxamine (Luvox), which is used in the treatment of OCD; citalopram (Celexa); and escitalopram (Lexapro). All are equally effective. Table 16.2 lists some of the most widely used antidepressant medications. SSRIs are chemically unrelated to the older, TCAs and to the MAO inhibitors. However, most antidepressants work by increasing the availability of serotonin, norepinephrine, or both. As their name implies, the SSRIs serve to inhibit the reuptake  table   16.1  Commonly Prescribed antipsychotic medications Drug Class generic name Trade name Dose range (mg)  Second- Generation (Atypical) clozapine risperidone olanzapine quetiapine ziprasidone aripiprazole lurasidone Clozaril Risperdal Zyprexa Seroquel Geodon Abilify Latuda 300–900 1–8 5–20 100–750 80–160 15–30 40–120 First- Generation (Conventional) chlorpromazine perphenazine molindone thiothixene trifluroperazine haloperidol fluphenazine Thorazine Trilafon Moban Navane Stelazine Haldol Prolixin 75–900 12–64 50–200 15–60 6–40 2–100 2–20 Sources: Bezchlibnyk-Butler & Jeffries (2003); Buckley & Waddington (2001); and Sadock et al. (2009).
of the neurotransmitter serotonin following its release into the synapse. Unlike the tricyclics (which inhibit the reuptake of both serotonin and norepinephrine), SSRIs selectively inhibit the reuptake of serotonin (see Figure 16.1). They have become the preferred   antidepressant drugs , in large part due to very aggres- sive advertising by the pharmaceutical companies. SSRIs are also easier to use, have fewer side effects, and are generally not found to be fatal in overdose, as the tricyclics can be. However, there is no compelling evidence that they are more effective than other types of antidepressants (Sussman, 2009b). More recently, another class of medications has been intro- duced. These are called serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs; see Thase, 2009). Examples of antidepres- sants in this drug family are venlafaxine (Effexor) and duloxetine (Cymbalta). SNRIs block reuptake of both norepinephrine and serotonin. They have similar side effects to the SSRIs, and they are relatively safe in overdose. SNRIs seem to help a significant number of patients who have not responded well to other anti- depressants, and they are slightly more effective than SSRIs in the treatment of major depression (Papakostas et al., 2007). The newest antidepressant, which received FDA approval in 2011, is called Viibryd (vilazodone). It is a novel combination of an SSRI and a serotonin receptor agonist. Early reports suggest that vilazodone is safe and well tolerated by patients (Robinson et al., 2011) and that it works better than placebo for patients who are depressed (Khan et al., 2011). However, it remains to be learned how efficacious this medication is compared to other antidepressants in widespread use. Clinical trials with the SSRIs indicate that patients tend to improve after about 3 to 5 weeks of treatment. Patients who show at least a 50 percent improvement in their symptoms are considered to have had a positive response to treatment (see Figure 16.2). However, although considerably better, such patients are not fully well. When treatment removes all of a patient’s symptoms, patients are considered to be in a period  table   16.2  Commonly Prescribed antidepressant medications Drug Class generic name Trade name Dose range (mg) SSri   fluoxetine sertraline paroxetine fluvoxamine citalopram escitalopram Prozac Zoloft Paxil Luvox Celexa Lexapro 10–80 50–200 10–60 50–300 10–60 10–20  Snri   venlafaxine duloxetine Effexor Cymbalta 75–375 40–60  Tricyclic   amitriptyline clomipramine desipramine doxepin imipramine nortriptyline trimipramine Elavil Anafranil Norpramin Sinequan Tofranil Aventyl Surmontil 75–300 75–300 75–300 75–300 75–300 40–200 75–300  maoi   phenelzine tranylcypromine isocarboxazid Nardil Parnate Marplan 45–90 20–60 30–50  atypical   bupropion trazodone Wellbutrin Desyrel 225–450 150–600 Sources: Bezchlibnyk-Butler & Jeffries (2003); Buckley & Waddington (2001); and Sadock et al. (2009).  figure   16.1  SSris.   Serotonin is synthesized from the amino acid tryptophan. After being released into the synaptic cleft, it binds to receptors on the post- synaptic neuron. A serotonin reuptake transporter then returns it back to the presynaptic neuron. SSRI medications block this reuptake process, leaving more serotonin available in the synapse.  Source: Ciccarelli, S. K., and White, J. N. Reprinted from   Psychology   (2nd ed.), © 2008, Pearson Education Inc., Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.  Serotonin Serotonin reuptake sites Presynaptic neuron Postsynaptic neuron SSRI Synapse Serotonin receptors  Actress Brooke Shields is one of many public figures who have been open with the public about their experiences with depression.
of remission (see Figure 16.3). If this remission is sustained for 6 to 12 months or more, the patient is considered to have recov- ered. In other words, he or she is fully well again. Side effects of the SSRIs include nausea, diarrhea, nervous- ness, insomnia, and sexual problems such as diminished sexual interest and difficulty with orgasm (Nemeroff & Schatzberg, 2007). After early reports linking Prozac with increased risk of suicide (e.g., Cole & Bodkin, 1990; Papp & Gorman, 1990) there was a decline in its use. However, Prozac is no more asso- ciated with suicide than other antidepressants are (Jick et al., 2004). Recently there has also been concern that, when used during pregnancy, fluoxetine (Prozac) and paroxetine (Paxil) may increase the risk of heart abnormalities in the baby (Diav- Citrin et al., 2008; Malm et al., 2011). For this reason these medications are not recommended as a first option for women planning to become pregnant. It is important to keep in mind, however that all the risks we have just described are small when weighed against the risks associated with leaving depressed peo- ple without adequate treatment. Although SSRIs help many people, some people have side effects that are so extreme that they are unable to continue to take their medication as prescribed. Researchers are now exploring the role that genes play in making some people espe- cially susceptible to the adverse effects of specific medications (Hu et al., 2007).  monoamine oxiDaSe inhibiTorS   Although they are used infrequently now, these were the first antidepressant medications to be developed, in the 1950s. These drugs were being studied for the treatment of tuberculosis when they were found to elevate the mood of patients (Stahl, 2000). They were later shown to be effective in treating depression. Monoamine oxidase inhibi- tors include isocarboxazid (Marplan), phenelzine (Nardil), tran- ylcypromine (Parnate), and selegiline (Eldepryl). They inhibit the activity of monoamine oxidase, an enzyme present in the synaptic cleft that helps break down the monoamine neurotrans- mitters (such as serotonin and norepinephrine) that have been released into the cleft. Patients taking MAO inhibitors must  figure   16.2  Defining a Positive response.   When treatment of depression results in at least 50 percent improvement in symptoms, it is called a response. Such patients are better, but not well.  Time  Normal 50% 100%  Mood  Episode of depression Beginning of clinical response  figure   16.3  Defining recovery.   When treatment of depression results in removal of essentially all symptoms, it is called remission for the first several months, and then recovery if it is sustained for longer than 6 to 12 months. Such patients are not just better—they are well.  Remission phase Recovery Normal 50% 100%  Mood Time  Clinical improvement begins Episode of depression
avoid foods rich in the amino acid tyramine (such as salami and Stilton cheese). This limits the drugs’ clinical usefulness. Nevertheless, they are used in certain cases of atypical depression that are characterized by hypersomnia and overeating and do not respond well to other classes of antidepressant medication (Nemeroff & Schatzberg, 2007).  TriCyCliC anTiDePreSSanTS   The TCAs operate to inhibit the reuptake of norepinephrine and (to a lesser extent) serotonin once these have been released into the synapse. Their discovery was also serendipitous in that the first TCA— imipramine—was being studied as a possible treatment for schizophrenia when it was found to elevate mood. The theory that these drugs work by increasing norepinephrine activity is now known to be oversimplified. It is also known that when the tricyclics are taken for several weeks, they alter a number of other aspects of cellular functioning including how receptors function and how cells respond to the activation of receptors and the synthesis of neurotransmitters. Because these alterations in cellular functioning parallel the time course for these drugs to exert their antidepressant effects, one or more of these changes are likely to be involved in mediating their antidepressant effects (refer back to Figure 16.3).  oTher anTiDePreSSanTS   Trazodone (Desyrel) was the first antidepressant to be introduced in the United States that was not lethal when taken in overdose. It specifically inhibits the reuptake of serotonin. Trazodone has heavy sedating properties that limit its usefulness. It is sometimes used in combination with SSRIs and taken at night to help counter the adverse effects the SSRIs often have on sleep. In rare cases, it can produce a condition in men called priapism (Nemeroff & Schatzberg, 2007). Priapism is prolonged erection in the absence of any sexual stimulation. Bupropion (Wellbutrin) is an antidepressant that is not structurally related to other antidepressants. It inhibits the reup- take of both norepinephrine and dopamine. In addition to being an antidepressant medication, bupropion also reduces nicotine cravings and symptoms of withdrawal in people who want to stop smoking. One clinical advantage of bupropion is that, unlike some of the SSRIs, it does not inhibit sexual functioning (Nemeroff & Schatzberg, 2007).  uSing anTiDePreSSanTS To TreaT anxieTy DiSor- DerS, bulimia nervoSa, anD PerSonaliTy DiSorDerS  In addition to their usefulness in treating depression, the anti- depressant drugs are also widely used in the treatment of various other disorders. For example, SSRIs are often used in the treat- ment of panic disorder, social phobia, and generalized anxiety disorder, as well as obsessive-compulsive disorder (Dougherty et al., 2007; Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2007). However, some peo- ple with panic disorder are greatly bothered by the side effects of these drugs (which create some of the symptoms to which panic patients are hypersensitive), so they quickly discontinue the medication. SSRIs and tricyclic antidepressants are also used in the treatment of bulimia nervosa. Many studies have shown that these antidepressants are useful in reducing binge eating and purging (Wilson & Fairburn, 2007). Patients with Cluster B personality disorders such as borderline personality disorder may show a decrease in certain symptoms, most notably mood labil- ity, if they take SSRIs (Rinne et al., 2002).  antianxiety Drugs  Antianxiety drugs   are used for conditions in which tension and anxiety are significant components. They do not provide a cure. However, these medications can keep symptoms under control until patients are able to receive other forms of effective psycho- logical treatments. The fact that they are so widely prescribed has caused concern among some leaders in the medical and psychiat- ric fields because of these drugs’ addictive potential and sedating effects. Antianxiety medications have little place in the treatment of psychosis. However, they are often used as supplementary treatments in certain neurological disorders to control such symptoms as convulsive seizures.  benzoDiazePineS   The most important and widely used class of antianxiety (or anxiolytic) drugs are the benzodiazepines. Another class of drugs, the barbiturates (e.g., phenobarbitol), is seldom used today except to control seizures or as anesthet- ics during electroconvulsive therapy.) The first benzodiazepines were released in the early 1960s. They are now the drugs of choice for the treatment of acute anxiety and agitation. They are rapidly absorbed from the digestive tract and start to work very quickly. At low doses they help quell anxiety; at higher doses they act as sleep-inducing agents and can be used to treat insomnia. For this reason, people taking these medications are cautioned about driving or operating machinery.  Antianxiety medications are widely prescribed. Why has this caused concern among some leaders in the medical and psychiatric fields?
One problem with benzodiazepines is that patients can become psychologically and physiologically dependent on them (Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2007). Patients taking these medica- tions must be “weaned” from them gradually because of the risk of withdrawal symptoms, which include seizures in some cases. Moreover, relapse rates following discontinuation of these drugs are extremely high (Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2007). For example, as many as 60 to 80 percent of panic patients relapse following discontinuation of Xanax. Table 16.3 lists some commonly prescribed antianxiety medications. Benzodiazepines and related anxiolytic medications are believed to work by enhancing the activity of GABA receptors (Stahl, 2000). GABA (gamma aminobutyric acid) is an inhibi- tory neurotransmitter that plays an important role in the way our brain inhibits anxiety in stressful situations. The benzodiazepines appear to enhance GABA activity in certain parts of the brain known to be implicated in anxiety such as the limbic system.  Other AntiAnxiety MedicAtiOns   The only new class of antianxiety medication that has been released since the early 1960s is buspirone (Buspar), which is completely unrelated to the benzodiazepines and is thought to act in complex ways on se- rotonergic functioning rather than on GABA. It has been shown to be as effective as the benzodiazepines in treating generalized  table   16.3  commonly Prescribed Antianxiety Medications drug class Generic name trade name dose range (mg) Benzodiazepines   alprazolam clonazepam diazepam lorazepam oxazepam clorazepate chlordiazepoxide Xanax Klonopin Valium Ativan Serax Tranxene Librium 0.5–10 1–6 4–40 1–6 30–120 15–60 10–150  Other   buspirone   Buspar   5–30 Sources: Bezchlibnyk-Butler & Jeffries (2003); Buckley & Waddington (2001); and Sadock et al. (2009).  T he recent publication of   DSM-5   has created a number of new diagnoses. It has also changed the diagnostic criteria for others. Of course, as a diagnostic manual, the  DSM   does not provide any information about treatment or make recommendations on that topic. However, changes in the   DSM  always have implications for treatment because a   DSM   diagnosis is necessary for clinical services to be covered by insurance. Here, we highlight some changes that are likely to have an impact on prevalence rates and medication usage in the years to come.  1.   New to   DSM-5   is the diagnosis of Disruptive Mood Regulation Disorder. This disorder is characterized by temper tantrums in a child older than 6 years of age. In order for the diagnosis to be made the angry outbursts must occur at least three times a week and be inconsistent with the child’s developmental level. On the plus side, this diagnosis may allow children with very irritable temperaments to receive specialized help at an early age. However, there is also a risk that many children whose parents might benefit from paren- tal skills training will instead receive powerful tranquilizing medications while their young brains are still maturing and developing.  2.   To be diagnosed with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in   DSM-IV   symptoms had to develop before the child reached the age of 7. In   DSM-5   this age of onset has been raised to age 12. Many children who would not have been eligible to be diagnosed with ADHD (because their symptoms developed when they were 8, 9, or 10) will now receive the diagnosis. This simple change in the diag- nostic criteria will dramatically increase the prevalence of ADHD. And, although it will allow many more children to receive treatment, it will undoubtedly result in many more children being medicated.  3.   Another major change that was proposed for   DSM-5 , but not accepted, was to lower the threshold for the diagnosis of Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD). In addition to excessive anxiety and worry,   DSM-IV   required the presence of three additional symptoms. In   DSM-5   it was proposed that only one symptom (either muscle tension or a feeling of being on edge) should be required. This change would undoubtedly have led to a substantial increase in the number of people diagnosed with GAD. Had the change been approved, some people might have been relieved to learn that their worry- ing reflected a psychiatric disorder. However, had it been accepted, this change would likely have further increased the numbers of people who come to rely on antianxiety medica- tions to get through the day. What do you think about the changes that were made (or not made)? Are you in favor of relaxing diagnostic criteria and mak- ing more and more people eligible to receive clinical treatment? Or are you concerned that we are in danger of pathologizing normal life and increasing the inappropriate use of psychiatric medications?  source:   Reprinted with permission from the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition, (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.  What Are Some of the Clinical Implications of the Recent Changes?   DSM 5  thinking critically   about DSM-5
anxiety disorder (Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2007), although pa- tients who have previously taken benzodiazepines tend not to respond as well as patients who have never taken them. Buspar has a low potential for abuse, probably because it has no sedative or muscle-relaxing properties and so is less pleasurable for pa- tients. It also does not cause any withdrawal effects. The primary drawback to the use of buspirone is that it takes 2 to 4 weeks to exert any anxiolytic effects. It is therefore not useful in acute situations. Because it is nonsedating, it cannot be used to treat insomnia.  lithium and other mood-Stabilizing Drugs  In the late 1940s John Cade in Australia discovered that lithium salts such as lithium carbonate were effective in treating manic disorders. One of Cade’s (1949) own cases serves well as an illus- tration of the effects of lithium treatment.  Lithium Helps a Difficult Patient   Mr. W. B. was a 51-year-old man who had been in a state of chronic manic excite- ment for 5 years. So obnoxious and destructive was his behavior that he had long been regarded as the most difficult patient on his ward in the hospital. He was started on treatment with a lithium compound, and within 3 weeks his behavior had improved so much that transfer to the convalescent ward was deemed appropriate. He remained in the hospital for another 2 months, during which time his behavior continued to be essentially normal. Prior to discharge, he was switched to another form of lithium salts because the one he had been taking had caused stomach upset. He was soon back at his job and living a happy and produc- tive life. In fact, he felt so good that, contrary to instructions, he stopped taking his lithium. Thereafter he steadily became more irritable and erratic; some 6 months following his discharge, he had to cease work. In another 5 weeks he was back at the hospi- tal in an acute manic state. Lithium therapy was immediately reestablished, with prompt positive results. In another month Mr. W. B. was pronounced ready to return to home and work, provided that he not fail to continue taking a prescribed dosage of lithium.  It was about 20 years until lithium treatment was intro- duced, around 1970, in the United States. There were at least two reasons for this delay. First, lithium had been used in the 1940s and 1950s as a salt substitute for patients with hyperten- sion before its toxic side effects were known. Some tragic deaths resulted, making the medical community very wary of using it for any reason. Second, because it is a naturally occurring com- pound, it is unpatentable. This meant that drug companies did not find it profitable to investigate its effects. Nevertheless, lith- ium is still widely used for the treatment of bipolar disorder and is marketed as Eskalith and Lithobid. Although lithium has been used for many years, exactly how it brings about its therapeutic effect is still not certain (Stahl, 2000). Even though we still do not know exactly how it works, there is no doubt about the effectiveness of lithium. As many as 70 to 80 percent of patients in a clear manic state show marked improvement after 2 to 3 weeks of taking lithium (Keck & McElroy, 2002). In addition, lithium sometimes relieves depres- sion, although probably mainly in patients with bipolar depres- sion (Stahl, 2000). There is increasing evidence that lithium maintenance treatment may be less reliable at preventing future episodes of mania than was once thought. For example, several studies of bipolar patients maintained on lithium for 5 years or more found that only just over one-third remained in remission. Nevertheless, discontinuation of lithium is also very risky. The probability of relapse is estimated to be 28 times higher after withdrawal than when the patient is on lithium, with about 50 percent relapsing within 6 months (Keck & McElroy, 2007). Side effects of lithium include increased thirst, gastrointesti- nal difficulties, weight gain, tremor, and fatigue. In addition, lith- ium can be toxic if the recommended dose is exceeded or if the kidneys fail to excrete it from the body at a normal rate. Lithium toxicity is a serious medical condition. If not treated swiftly and appropriately, it can cause neuronal damage or even death. Despite the clinical benefits of lithium, not all patients with bipolar disorder take it exactly as prescribed. Many seem to miss the “highs” and the abundance of energy associated with their hypomanic episodes, so when faced with unpleasant side effects and the loss of these highs they may stop taking the drug. Although lithium is still widely used, other drugs are also con- sidered first-line treatments for bipolar disorder (see Table 16.4). These include divalproic acid (Depakote) and carbamazepine (Tegretol). Other drugs that are currently being researched and used clinically as treatments for rapid cycling bipolar disorders are gabapentin (Neurontin), lamotrigine (Lamictal), and topiramate (Topamax). Many of these drugs are also used in the treatment of epilepsy and are anticonvulsant agents (Keck & McElroy, 2007). Carbamazepine has been associated with significant side effects including blood problems, hepatitis, and serious skin conditions  table   16.4  Commonly Prescribed mood-Stabilizing medications Drug Class generic name Trade name Dose range (mg) lithium   lithium   Eskalith   400–1200  anticonvulsants   carbamazepine divalproex lamotrigine gabapentin topiramate Tegretol Depakote Lamictal Neurontin Topamax 300–1600 750–3000 100–500 900–3600 50–1300 Sources: Bezchlibnyk-Butler & Jeffries (2003); Buckley & Waddington (2001); and Sadock et al. (2009).
(Post & Frye, 2009). As with lithium, careful blood monitoring of patients is required. Valproate probably has the fewest and mildest side effects, which can include nausea, diarrhea, sedation, tremor, and weight gain. Abilify, an antipsychotic medication, is also now being marketed as a treatment for bipolar disorder.  electroconvulsive Therapy  Using convulsions to treat mental disorders dates back to the Swiss physician and alchemist Paracelsus (1493–1541), who induced a patient with “lunacy” to drink camphor until he experienced convulsions (Abrams, 2002; Mowbray, 1959). However, Ladis- las von Meduna, a Hungarian physician, is generally regarded as the modern originator of this treatment approach. Von Meduna noted—erroneously, as it turned out—that schizophrenia rarely occurred in people with epilepsy. This observation caused him to infer that schizophrenia and epilepsy were somehow incompatible and to speculate that one might be able to cure schizophrenia by inducing convulsions. In an early treatment effort, von Meduna used camphor to induce convulsions in a patient with schizophre- nia, who relatively quickly regained lucidity after the convulsive therapy. Later, von Meduna began to use a drug called Metrazol to induce convulsions because it operated more rapidly. Another early approach, adopted by Sakel in the 1930s, was to cause convulsions by injecting patients with insulin (see Fink, 2003). However, these chemical methods gave physicians no control over the induction and timing of the seizures. Then, in 1938, Italian physicians Ugo Cerletti and Lucio Bini tried the simplest method of all—passing an electric current through a patient’s head. This method, which became known as   electro- convulsive therapy (ECT) , is still used today (see Chapter 7). In the United States, about 100,000 patients are treated with ECT each year (Prudic, 2009). The general public often views ECT as a horrific and primi- tive form of treatment, influenced no doubt by its depiction in movies such as   One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest . Indeed, a number of malpractice lawsuits have been brought against psychiatrists who use ECT, primarily over the failure to obtain appropriate patient consent, which can be very difficult when patients may not be legally competent to give such consent due to their illness (Abrams, 2002; Leong & Eth, 1991). However, despite the distaste with which some people regard ECT, it is a safe, effective, and important form of treatment. In fact, it is the only way of dealing with some severely depressed and suicidal patients—patients who may have failed to respond to other forms of treatment. In addition, it is often the treatment of choice for severely depressed women who are pregnant, for whom taking antidepressants may be problematic, as well as for the elderly, who may have medical conditions that make taking antidepressant drugs dangerous (Pandya et al., 2007). Reviews evaluating research on ECT have concluded that it is an effective treatment for patients with severe or psychotic- level depression, as well as for some patients with mania (Prudic, 2009). Properly administered, ECT is not thought to cause structural damage to the brain (Devanand et al., 1994), although this issue remains controversial (Reisner, 2003). Every neu- rotransmitter system is affected by ECT, and ECT is known to downregulate the receptors for norepinephrine, increasing the functional availability of this neurotransmitter. However, exactly how ECT works is still not fully clear (Abrams, 2002). ECT can be administered in one of two ways. In bilateral ECT, electrodes are placed on either side of the patient’s head (see Figure 16.4 on p. 577), and brief constant-current electrical pulses of either high or low intensity are passed from one side of the head to the other for up to about 1.5 seconds. In contrast, unilateral ECT (see Figure 16.4 on p. 577) involves limiting current flow to one side of the brain, typically the nondominant side (right side, for most people). A general anesthetic allows the patient to sleep through the procedure, and muscle relaxants are used to prevent the violent contractions that, in the early days of ECT, could be so severe as to cause the patient to fracture bones.  Carrie Fisher, who played Princess Leia in the Star Wars films, has been helped by ECT.  A patient who receives electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) today is given sedative and muscle-relaxant medications prior to the procedure to pre- vent violent contractions. In the days before such medication was avail- able, the initial seizure was sometimes so violent as to fracture vertebrae.
A bite block is also used to avoid injury to the teeth. Today, if you were to observe someone receiving ECT, all you might see would be a small twitch of the hand, perhaps, as the convulsions occurred. After the ECT is over, the patient has amnesia for the period immediately preceding the therapy and is usually somewhat con- fused for the next hour or so. Normally, a treatment series con- sists of fewer than a dozen sessions, although occasionally more are needed. Treatments are usually administered two or three times per week (Pandya et al., 2007). Empirical evidence suggests that bilateral ECT is more effec- tive than unilateral ECT. Unfortunately, bilateral ECT is also associated with more severe cognitive side effects and memory problems (Reisner, 2003). For instance, patients often have dif- ficulty forming new memories (anterograde amnesia) for about 3 months after ECT ends. Physicians must therefore weigh the greater clinical benefits of bilateral ECT against its tendency to cause greater cognitive side effects. Some clinicians recommend starting with unilateral ECT and switching to bilateral after five or six treatments if no improvement is seen (Abrams, 2002). A dramatic early example of successful ECT treatments is provided in the autobiographical account of Lenore McCall (1947/1961), who suffered a severe depressive disorder in her middle years.  Using ECT to Treat Severe Depression  Ms. McCall, a well-educated woman of affluent circumstances and the mother of three children, noticed a feeling of persistent fatigue as the first sign of her impending descent into depres- sion. Too fearful to seek help, she at first attempted to fight off her increasingly profound apathy by engaging in excessive activ- ity, a defensive strategy that accomplished little but the deple- tion of her remaining strength and emotional reserves. In due course, she noticed that her mental processes seemed to be deteriorating—her memory appeared impaired and she could concentrate only with great difficulty. Emotionally, she felt an enormous loneliness, bleakness of experience, and increasingly intense fear about what was happening to her mind. She came to view her past small errors of commission and omis- sion as the most heinous of crimes and increasingly withdrew from contact with her husband and children. Eventually, at her husband’s and her physician’s insistence, she was hospitalized despite her own vigorous resistance. She felt betrayed and shortly thereafter attempted suicide by shattering a drinking glass and ingesting its fragments. To her great disappointment, she survived. Ms. McCall then spent nearly 4 years continuously in two separate mental hospitals, during which time she deteriorated further. She was silent and withdrawn, behaved in a mechanical fashion, lost an alarming amount of weight, and underwent a seemingly premature aging process. She felt that she emitted an offensive odor. At this time, ECT was introduced into the thera- peutic procedures in use at her hospital. A series of ECT treatments was given to Ms. McCall over about a 3-month period. Then one day, she woke up in the morn- ing with a totally changed outlook: “I sat up suddenly, my heart pounding. I looked around the room and a sweep of wonder surged over me. God in heaven, I’m well. I’m myself. . . .” After a brief period of convalescence, she went home to her husband and children.  neurosurgery  Although   neurosurgery   was used occasionally in the nineteenth century to treat mental disorders by relieving pressure in the brain (Berrios, 1990), it was not considered a treatment for psychological problems until the twentieth century. In 1935 in Portugal, Antonio Moniz introduced a neurosurgical proce- dure in which the frontal lobes of the brain were severed from the deeper centers underlying them. This technique eventually evolved into an operation known as prefrontal lobotomy, which stands as a dubious tribute to the extremes to which profes- sionals have sometimes been driven in their search for effective treatments for the psychoses. In retrospect, it is ironic that this procedure—which results in permanent structural changes in the brain of the patient and has been highly criticized by many within the profession—won Moniz the 1949 Nobel Prize in medicine (although he was later shot by a former patient who was, presumedly, less than grateful). From 1935 to 1955 (when antipsychotic drugs became available), tens of thousands of mental patients in the United States and abroad were subjected to prefrontal lobotomies and related neurosurgical procedures. In some settings, as many as 50 patients were treated in a single day (Freeman, 1959). Ini- tial reports of results tended to be enthusiastic, downplaying complications (which included a 1 to 4 percent death rate) and  figure   16.4  electrode Placement for eCT.   In unilateral ECT, current is limited to one side of the brain. In bilateral ECT, electrodes are placed on each side of the head. Bilateral ECT is more effective but is also associated with more cognitive side effects and memory problems. Based on Sadock & Sadock (2003, p. 1142).  Unilateral   Bilateral
undesirable side effects. It was eventually recognized, however, that the side effects of psychosurgery could be very undesirable indeed. In some instances they included a permanent inability to inhibit impulses, in others an unnatural “tranquility” with unde- sirable shallowness or absence of feeling The introduction of the major antipsychotic drugs caused an immediate decrease in the widespread use of psychosur- gery, especially prefrontal lobotomy. Such operations are rare today and are used only as a last resort for patients who have not responded to any other form of treatment for a period of 5 years and who are experiencing extreme and disabling symptoms. Modern surgical techniques involve the selective destruction of minute areas of the brain. Psychosurgery is sometimes used for patients with debilitating obsessive-compulsive disorder (Dough- erty et al., 2007), treatment-resistant severe self-mutilation (Price et al., 2001), or even intractable anorexia nervosa (Morgan &  Rosemary Kennedy, sister of former president John F. Kennedy, had de- velopmental delays and behavioral problems. When she was 21, medical professionals recommended a prefrontal lobotomy. The surgery was a tragic failure, wiping out all her accomplishments and leaving little of her former personality. Rosemary is shown here on the right with her sister Kathleen (left) and mother Rose (center) before the surgery.  the World around us  Deep Brain Stimulation for Treatment-Resistant Depression  A n important development in the treatment of patients with severe and chronic mental health problems is deep brain stimulation. This involves stimulating patients’ brains electrically over a period of several months. First, sur- geons drill holes into the brain and implant small electrodes. Because this procedure is done under local anesthetic, patients can talk to the doctors about what is happening to them and tell the doctors about the changes they experience. In an early study involving six patients, all reported a response to the elec- trical stimulation even though they had no cues to tell them when current was being passed through the electrodes or when the current was off (Mayberg et al., 2005). When current was flowing into an area of the brain that is thought to be metaboli- cally overactive in depression (the cingulate region), patients reported that they felt better and had experiences of “sudden calmness or lightness,” “connectedness,” or “disappearance of the void” (p. 652). After the electrodes have been implanted, patients receive short sessions of deep brain stimulation in which current is passed through the implanted electrodes. Using the reports of the patients as a guide, the researchers can select the settings that will be used to provide stimulation through an implanted pulse device after the patients leave the hospital. How effective is deep brain stimulation as a treatment for unre- lenting depression? A total of 20 people who have received this treatment have now been followed up for an average of 3.5 years (Kennedy et al., 2011). The results suggest that this treatment is beneficial for approximately half of the patients. Many of those who responded also returned to work or be- gan to volunteer in their communities. Although a 50 percent response rate may not strike you as very high, keep in mind that only the most chronically ill people are eligible to receive this treatment. Although it is invasive, deep brain stimulation may be able to help a small majority of patients who have failed to show improvement with any other methods.  figure   16.5  Deep brain Stimulation.   In deep brain stimulation, electrodes are implanted into the brain. These are stimulated by pulse generators implanted into the chest region.  Source: Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2012. All Rights Reserved.
Crisp, 2000). However, such approaches carry serious risks. In one study, 25 patients who had received brain lesions to treat severe OCD were followed up an average of 11 years later. Twelve of the 25 patients experienced significant relief from their OCD symp- toms after the surgery. They also showed reductions in depression. However, 10 of the patients who showed clinical improvement also showed evidence of frontal lobe dysfunction at follow-up, including impaired executive functioning on cognitive tests, prob- lems with apathy, and disinhibited behavior (Rück et al., 2008). These results highlight the risks of brain surgery even when it is effective in treating the symptoms of OCD. Deep brain stimulation is a treatment approach that involves surgery but does not result in a permanent lesion being made in the brain. As The World Around Us box describes, this innova- tive form of therapy is now being used to help patients get some relief from their unrelenting symptoms of depression.  in review  What kinds of disorders can be treated with antipsychotic drugs? How do these drugs help patients? What are their drawbacks? Why have the SSRIs largely replaced MAO inhibitors and TCAs in routine clinical practice? What kinds of conditions can be treated with antidepressants? What kinds of medications can be used to treat acute anxiety and agitation? How are these medications believed to work? Do the clinical advantages of ECT outweigh its disadvantages?  unresolved issues  Do Psychiatric Medications Help or Harm?  D espite the benefits provided by evidence-based psycho- therapies, an increasing number of mental health out- patients are now being treated solely with medications. Recent findings from a national survey show that, over the 10-year period from 1998 to 2007, the percentage of people being treated with medications and psychotherapy declined from 40 percent to 32 percent. In contrast, the number of peo- ple being treated with medications alone rose from 41 percent to 51 percent (Olfson & Marcus, 2010). This is a surprising trend because the number of people who receive therapy in a given year has remained stable at around 3 percent. The trend may be related to the billions of dollars spent by the pharmaceutical industry to promote its products both to physi- cians and the general public alike. How many times have you seen a TV ad telling you to ask your doctor whether a certain medication is right for you? Because of this, many people are now receiving their psychiatric medications from their primary care physician and are never referred for (or do not seek) psy- chotherapy from a mental health specialist. Managed care or- ganizations have also had financial incentives to get patients to substitute medications for psychotherapy because, in the short term, medications are cheaper (Druss, 2010). But are we paying the price in a different currency? All of these changes are occurring at a time when serious concerns are being raised about psychiatric drugs and the harm that they may be causing in our society (Whitaker, 2010). Some observers believe that the pharmaceutical industry has made questionable claims about the biological causes of mental disorders in order to maxi- mize profits (Wyatt & Midkiff, 2006). Although no one would argue that they do not provide benefits for patients, psychiatric medications are often less helpful than people think. There is also evidence that some of the drugs used in the treatment of mental disorders may actually make things worse for patients in the long run, creating chemical imbalances and chronic illnesses rather than curing them (Whitaker, 2010). In light of these con- cerns it is important for all of us to be as informed as possible about the medications we take. This is especially so when chil- dren are involved. It also remains essential to preserve treatment options for patients and to improve access to evidence-based psychotherapies for all who need them.
16.1   Who seeks therapy and what are the goals of therapy?  People seek therapy for many reasons. These include stressful cur- rent circumstances, long-standing problems or chronic unhappi- ness, as well as a search for personal growth and insight into their own lives. In other cases, people are referred by their physician or required to seek treatment by a court. Psychological treatment is aimed at reducing abnormal behavior through psychological means. The goals of psychotherapy include changing maladaptive behavior, minimizing or eliminating stress- ful environmental conditions, reducing negative affect, improv- ing interpersonal competencies, resolving personal conflicts, modifying people’s inaccurate assumptions about themselves, and fostering a more positive self-image.  16.2   how is the success of psychotherapy measured?  Evaluation of the success of treatment can be based on the thera- pist’s impression of change, the report of the client, reports of the client’s family or friends, measures of change in specific target behaviors, or changes in scores from pre- to post-treatment on relevant measures or scales. Treatments that have been demonstrated to result in therapeutic change in controlled trials are referred to as evidence-based treatments.  16.3   What are some of the factors that must be considered to provide optimal treatment?  One must consider whether the treatment is evidence-based or empirically supported by efficacy studies, whether the use of medication is appropriate, and whether a combination of treatments is the best option. A key element in all therapies is the development of an effective “working alliance.” A principal social issue in psychotherapy is ensuring the development of a good therapeutic working alliance between client and therapist, even when they differ widely in cultural, ethnic, and/or socioeconomic backgrounds.  16.4   What psychological approaches are used to treat abnormal behavior?  Behavior therapy is extensively used to treat many clinical prob- lems. Behavior therapy approaches include exposure, aversion therapy, modeling, and reinforcement approaches. Cognitive or cognitive-behavioral therapy attempts to modify a person’s self-statements and construal of events in order to change his or her behavior. Cognitive-behavioral methods have been used for a wide variety of clinical problems—from depression to anger control—and with a range of clinical populations. Much research attests to the efficacy of these approaches. Other psychological treatment approaches include humanistic- experiential therapies and gestalt therapy. Classical psychoanalysis dates back to Sigmund Freud. It is rarely practiced today, and there is little empirical support for its efficacy. Several variants of therapy have developed out of the psycho- analytic tradition. These diverge from classical psychoanalysis on matters such as the duration of therapy and the role of primitive psychosexual drives in personality dynamics. Many of the newer psychodynamic forms of treatment emphasize the way interper- sonal processes are affected by early interactions with parents and other family members. In addition to their use in treating individuals, some psychologi- cal treatment methods are applied to problematic relationships through couple or family therapy. These approaches typically assume that a person’s problems lie partly in his or her interac- tions with others. Consequently, the focus of treatment is on changing the ways in which members of the social or family unit interact.  16.5   What roles do social values and culture play in psychotherapy?  Although psychotherapy is a set of tools to be used in pursuit of a client’s welfare, not an ethics system, therapists are often faced with moral dilemmas in the course of treatment. Racial and ethnic minorities are currently underserved by the mental health system.  16.6   What biological approaches to treating abnormal behavior are available?  Medications are important in the treatment of many disorders. It is now common in clinical practice to combine medication and psychological treatments. The most commonly used antipsychotic medications are the atypical neuroleptics. These improve both positive and negative symptoms and have fewer extrapyramidal symptoms (unwanted side effects involving movement) than conventional (first- generation) antipsychotics. Some of the earlier antidepressant medications (e.g., tricyclics and MAO inhibitors) have now been replaced by SSRIs and SNRIs. Although more widely used, there is no compelling evi- dence that these newer medications are more effective than the older antidepressants. In general, antidepressants work through their influence on the serotonin and norepinephrine neurotrans- mitter systems. Anxiolytic (antianxiety) medications work via their effect on the GABA system. They are widely prescribed. Lithium is an important medication in the treatment of mania. However, some of the newer mood-stabilizing drugs (which are also used to treat epilepsy) are now more frequently prescribed. Although not frequently used, ECT is a safe and effective treatment for depression and other disorders. It causes some short-term cognitive side effects, especially when administered bilaterally. Neurosurgery is used as a treatment of last resort. Even when patients improve clinically, they may have permanent, adverse side effects.  16   summary
key terms  antianxiety drugs   573  antidepressant drugs   571  behavior therapy   556  client-centered therapy   561  countertransference   565  couple therapy   566  efficacy   554  electroconvulsive therapy (eCT)   576  family therapy   567  flooding   556  gestalt therapy   563  imaginal exposure   556  in vivo   exposure   556  integrative behavioral couple therapy (ibCT)   567  latent content   565  manifest content   565  manualized therapies   555  modeling   557  motivational interviewing (mi)   562  neurosurgery   577  psychodynamic therapy   563  psychopharmacology   555  psychotherapy   549  randomized clinical trials (rCTs)   554  rational emotive behavior therapy (rebT)   559  resistance   565  response shaping   558  structural family therapy   567  systematic desensitization   556  tardive dyskinesia   570  token economy   558  traditional behavioral couple therapy (TbCT)   566  transference   565
learning objectives  17.1  What is the importance of prevention in mental health care?  17.2  What is the status and contemporary issues of inpatient mental health treatment?  17.3  What are the controversial legal issues involving the mentally ill?  17.4  What national and international organizations promote efforts for mental health?  17.5  What are the challenges for the future of abnormal psychology?  A Tragic Case of Murder as an Outcome of Severe Mental Illness   On Mother’s Day weekend in 2003, Deanna Laney, a very religious 39-year-old housewife and mother from Texas, began to see “signs from God” that she was sup- posed to do something drastic about her children. The first sign indicated to her that she was supposed to destroy her children when she saw her fourteen-month-old son, Aaron, playing with a spear. She hesitated because she was uncertain of exactly what the sign from God meant. Then she received another sign when Aaron handed her a rock that he was playing with. She then saw him squeezing a frog and began to conclude that she was sup- posed to kill her children, either by stoning them, strangling them, or stabbing them. She believed that God had given her three ways to kill them but concluded that killing them with rocks would be better than strangulation. She killed two of her sons by beating them with a rock; her third son, Aaron, was severely injured but survived her attack. She called 911 and reported that she had killed her sons. After she was arrested, she was very puzzled and behaved in an extreme manner, for example, lying in a fetal position and crying in the cell, walking around the cell singing gospel songs, and often praying and crying. The sheriff in the prison reported that “when she suddenly realizes what she’s done she goes an extreme blank stare and withdrawal.” She was placed on a sui- cide watch because of her intense and psychotic behavior. Laney had a history of serious mental illness including a prior psychotic experience in which she was hospitalized. During this episode, she reported that she had smelled sulfur and concluded that this was God’s way of warning her that the devil was close. She was diagnosed with schizophrenia. At her murder trial, Laney pleaded Not Guilty by Reason of Insanity (NGRI) (to be discussed later in the chapter). Her defense was based on her belief that God had told her the world was going to end and “she had to get her house in order,” which included killing her children. The psychiatric evaluations of her mental health status prior to the trial reflected a strong consen- sus as to her condition. Psychiatrists who served as experts from both the defense and the prosecution in this case testified that Laney was psychotic at the time of the crime and met the criteria for NGRI. The evaluating psychiatrists concluded that Laney had crushed her sons’ skulls with rocks because she was suffering from delusions and did not know right from wrong. The jury acquitted her of all charges on grounds that she was insane at the time of the crime. Apparently, there was no pre- meditation, and Laney did not believe that she was doing wrong; thus she was found not guilty by reason of insanity (Associated Press, 2004; Ramsland, 2005).  The final chapter of this book has traditionally been somewhat of a highlight for several important topics in abnormal psychol- ogy that have been noted only briefly in earlier chapters. These issues are very important to understanding the field of abnormal psychology and will give the reader a broader perspective on ways our society deals with, or in some cases fails to deal with, abnor- mal behavior or its consequences. We begin with the topic of pre- vention of mental disorders. Over the years, most mental health efforts have been geared toward helping people after they have already developed serious problems. If the goal is to reduce or eliminate emotional problems in our country or the world, then a major alteration in thinking is required. We need to expand efforts at prevention through early intervention (Breitborde et al., 2010; Tortolero, 2010). Next, we will describe inpatient mental health treatment and the state of mental hospitals in contemporary society, including a discussion of the prison system where many mental health patients end up. We will discuss changes that have taken place and some of the forces that have affected inpatient psy- chiatric care today. Following this, several legal issues pertinent to psychiatric care and the hospitalization of people with severe psychological problems will be addressed. We will then briefly survey the scope of organized efforts for mental health both in the United States and throughout the world. Finally, we will con- sider what each of us can do to foster mental health.  Perspectives on Prevention  In the early 1990s, the U.S. Congress directed the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) to work with the Institute of Medicine (IOM) to develop a report detailing a long-term  17
prevention research program. Among other things, the IOM report focused attention on the distinction between prevention and treatment efforts (Dozois & Dobson, 2004; Munoz, 2001; Munoz et al., 1996). Prevention efforts are classified into three subcategories:  1.   Universal interventions:   Efforts that are aimed at influenc- ing the general population.  2.   Selective interventions:   Efforts that are aimed at a specific subgroup of the population considered at risk for developing mental health problems—for example, adolescents or ethnic minorities (Coie et al., 2000).  3.   Indicated interventions:   Efforts that are directed toward high-risk individuals who are identified as having minimal but detectable symptoms of mental disorder but who do not meet criteria for clinical diagnosis—for example, individuals forced from their homes by a flood or some other disaster (see Reyes & Jacobs, 2006). As shown in Figure 17.1, preventive efforts are clearly differ- entiated from treatment and maintenance interventions.  Universal Interventions  Universal interventions perform two key tasks: (1) altering condi- tions that can cause or contribute to mental disorders (risk fac- tors) and (2) establishing conditions that foster positive mental health (protective factors). Epidemiological studies help investiga- tors obtain information about the incidence and distribution of various maladaptive behaviors (Dozois & Dobson, 2004) such as those seen in anxiety-based disorders (Feldner et al., 2004). These findings can then be used to suggest what preventive efforts might be most appropriate. For example, various epidemiological stud- ies and reviews have shown that certain groups are at high risk for mental disorders: recently divorced people (Bulloch et al., 2009), the physically disabled (Goodheart & Rozensky, 2011), elderly people (Houtjes et al., 2010), the physically abused (Panuzio & DiLillo, 2010), people who have been uprooted from their homes (Caracci & Mezzich, 2001), and victims of severe trauma (Jaranson et al., 2004). Although findings such as these may be the basis for immediate selective or indicated prevention, they may also aid in universal prevention by telling us what to look for and where to look—in essence, by focusing our efforts in the right direction. Universal prevention is very broad and includes biological, psychosocial, and sociocultural efforts. Virtually any effort that is aimed at improving the human condition would be considered a part of universal prevention of mental disorder.  BIologIcal StrategIeS   Biologically based universal strate- gies for prevention begin with promoting adaptive lifestyles. Many of the goals of health psychology can be viewed as univer- sal prevention strategies. Efforts geared toward improving diet, establishing a routine of physical exercise, and developing overall good health habits can do much to improve physical well-being (Martins et al., 2010). Physical illness always produces some sort of psychological stress that can result in such problems as depres- sion, so with respect to good mental health, maintaining good physical health is prevention.  PSychoSocIal StrategIeS   In viewing normality as optimal development and viewing high functioning (rather than the mere absence of pathology) as the goal, we imply that people need opportunities to learn physical, intellectual, emotional, and social competencies.  1.   The first requirement for psychosocial health is that a person develop the skills needed for effective problem solving, for expressing emotions constructively, and for engaging in satisfying relationships with others. Failure to develop these protective skills places the individual at a serious disadvan- tage in coping with stresses and the unavoidable risk factors for mental disorder.  2.   The second requirement for psychosocial health is that a person acquire an accurate frame of reference on which to build his or her identity. We have seen repeatedly that when people’s assumptions about themselves or their world are inaccurate, their behavior is likely to be maladaptive.  Universal Selective Case identification Compliance with long-term treatment (Goal: Reduction in relapse and recurrence) Aftercare (including rehabilitation) Standard treatment for known disorders Indicated  P r e v e n t i o n M a i n t e n a n c e T r e a t m e n t  figure   17.1  classification of Prevention Strategies, treatment, and Maintenance.   The traditional terminology for describing general strategies of disease prevention in the field of public health has been revised to provide a more useful perspective on prevention efforts. The new classification system for prevention (universal, selective, and indicated strategies) is shown in this context as distinct from treatment interventions and maintenance approaches to mental health problems.  Source: From P. J. Mrazek & R. J. Haggerty (Eds.). (1994).   Reducing risks for mental disorders: Frontiers for preventive intervention research . Copyright © 1994 by the National Academy of Sciences. Courtesy of the National Academy Press, Washington, DC.
Consider, for example, the young woman who believes that being thin can bring happiness and so becomes anorexic.  3.   The third requirement for psychosocial health is that a person be prepared for the types of problems likely to be encountered during given life stages. For example, young people who want to marry and have children must be pre- pared for the tasks of building a mutually satisfying relation- ship and helping children develop their abilities. Similarly, a middle-aged adult needs to be prepared for problems that are likely to arise during retirement and old age. In recent years, psychosocial measures aimed at prevention have received a great deal of attention. The field of behavioral med- icine has been influential (Hunter et al., 2009), with efforts being made to change the psychological factors underlying unhealthy habits such as smoking, excessive drinking, and poor eating habits.  SocIocUltUral StrategIeS   As has been demonstrated many times throughout this book, without a supportive community, individual development is stifled. At the same time, without re- sponsible, psychologically healthy individuals, the community will not thrive and, in turn, cannot be supportive. The psychosocially impaired victims of disorganized communities lack the where- withal to create better communities to protect and sustain the psy- chological health of those who come after them, and a persistently unprotective environment results. Sociocultural efforts toward universal prevention are focused on making the community as safe and attractive as possible for the individuals within it. With our growing recognition of the role that pathological social conditions play in producing maladaptive behavior (in socially impoverished communities), increased attention must be devoted to creating social conditions that will foster healthy development and functioning in individuals. Efforts to create these conditions include a broad spectrum of measures—ranging from public education and Social Security to economic planning and social legislation directed at ensuring adequate health care for all.  Selective Interventions  Preventing mental health problems through social change in the community is difficult. Although the whole psychological climate can ultimately be changed by a social movement such as the civil rights movement of the 1960s, the payoff of such efforts is generally far in the future and may be difficult or impos- sible to predict or measure. Attempts to effect psychologically desirable social change are also likely to involve ideological and political issues that may inspire powerful opposition, includ- ing opposition from government itself. Efforts to bring about change through targeting a smaller segment of the population can have more effective results. For example, a recent review of the research in reducing depression in children concludes that selective intervention programs are more effective than universal programs (Horowitz & Garber, 2006) in reducing the extent of depressive disorders.  an IllUStratIon of SelectIve PreventIon StrategIeS   Though difficult to formulate, mobilize, and carry out, selective intervention can bring about major improvements. In this section, we will look at the mobilization of prevention resources aimed at curtailing or reducing the problem of teenage alcohol and drug abuse. Prominent social forces such as advertis- ing and marketing campaigns that are attractive to youth, the influence of peer groups, and the ready availability of alcohol, tobacco, and even many illicit drugs are instrumental in promot- ing the early use of alcohol in young people. Although recent years have witnessed a decrease in the rate of adolescent substance use in the United States (Johnston et al., 2007), alcohol, tobacco, and other drug use by teenagers remains a persistent public health problem. Alcohol is the most commonly used drug among adolescents (Komro et al., 2008). Alcohol use among youth is related to many social, emotional, and behavioral problems (e.g., using illegal drugs, fighting, stealing, driving under the influence, having unplanned sex, and having school problems). In fact, early alcohol use is a strong predictor of lifetime alcohol abuse or dependence (Grant & Dawson, 1997). Because the factors that entice adolescents to begin using alcohol and drugs are influenced by social factors, it is tempt- ing to think that if these forces could be counterbalanced with equally powerful alternative influences, the rate of substance abuse might radically decline. But this is easier said than done. The U.S. government has approached the drug-abuse problem with three broad strategies for dealing with adolescent substance use, all of which have proved insufficient:  1.   Intercepting and/or Reducing the Supply of Drugs Avail- able.   The reduction of supply by policing our borders has  Preventing mental disorders and maintaining psychosocial health require that a person be prepared for the types of problems likely to be encoun- tered during given life stages. For example, how might young people who want to marry and have children prepare themselves for the tasks of building a mutually satisfying relationship and helping children develop their abilities?
had minimal impact on the availability of drugs. These programs do little to affect the supply of the two drugs most abused by adolescents—alcohol and tobacco—which are, of course, available in corner stores and even in the adolescent’s home. Reducing the supply of these drugs to adolescents is especially challenging given mass-media messages and other societal signals that these legal products can bring about so- cial acceptance, are essential for celebrations, and can mark a young person’s passage into adulthood, with limited cautions about their potential to damage health.  2.   Providing Treatment Services for Those Who Develop Drug Problems.   Although much money is spent each year on treat- ment, treating substance abuse is perhaps the least effective way to reduce the problem. Addictive disorders are very difficult to overcome, and treatment failure or relapse are the rule rather than the exception. Therapeutic programs for those addicted to drugs or alcohol, though necessary, are not the answer to elimi- nating or even significantly reducing the problems in our society.  3.   Encouraging Prevention.   By far the most desirable—and potentially the most effective—means of reducing the drug problem in our country is through prevention methods aimed at alerting citizens to the problems that surround drugs and teaching young people ways to avoid using them (Bloom et al., 2009). Although past efforts have had some limited success in discouraging adolescent drug use, many initially promising prevention efforts have failed to bring about the desired reduction in substance use. There are a number of reasons for this: The intervention typically has not been conducted for a long enough period to show the desired effect; the intervention efforts have not been power- ful enough to make a sufficient impact on the participants; or the strategy may not have been well implemented. In recent years prevention specialists have taken a more proactive position and have attempted to establish programs that prevent the development of abuse disorders before young people become so involved with drugs or alcohol that future adjustment becomes difficult, if not impossible. These recent prevention strategies have taken some diverse and promising directions. We will examine several such efforts and then discuss the limitations of these prevention approaches.  School-Based Interventions   The most promising alcohol- and drug-prevention curricula are based on behavioral theory; they target the risk (e.g., peer pressure, mass-media mes- sages) and protective (e.g., alcohol-free activities, messages sup- porting “no use” norms) factors associated with adolescent use; include developmentally appropriate information about alcohol and other drugs; are skill-based and interactive; and emphasize normative education that increases the awareness that most students do not use alcohol, tobacco, or other drugs (Komro & Toomey, 2002). While several such programs exist, some have been evaluated more extensively than others; for example, the Drug Abuse Resistance Education Program, or D.A.R.E. (a pro- gram that uses local police officers who are invited by the local school districts to speak and work with students after undergo- ing special training), recently underwent an extensive number of evaluative studies that have generally concluded that the program has limited success at deterring substance use. In fact, a 10-year follow-up study reported no success of the D.A.R.E. program (Lynam et al., 2009).  Intervention Programs for high-risk teens   Intervention programs identify high-risk teenagers and take special measures to circumvent their further use of alcohol or other potentially dangerous drugs (Hawkins et al., 2004). Programs such as these are often school-based efforts and are not strictly prevention programs because they intervene with young people who have already developed problems. Programs for early intervention can be effective in identifying adolescents before their alcohol or drug problems become entrenched (Foley & Hochman, 2006).  Efforts to teach schoolchildren about the dangers of drugs before they reach the age of maximum risk are based on the premise that if children are made aware of the dangers of drugs and alcohol, they will choose not to use them. However, evaluative studies have cast doubt on the effectiveness of programs such as D.A.R.E. What do you think might account for D.A.R.E.’s lack of success?  research CLOSE-UP  Intervention Programs of High-Risk Populations  This research strategy involves identifying high-risk individuals and providing special approaches to circumvent their problems; for example, identifying adolescents at risk for abusing alcohol and implementing a program to prevent the problem behavior.
Parent education and family-Based Intervention Programs   Through their own drinking or positive verbaliza- tions about alcohol, parents may encourage or sanction alco- hol use among teens. Some research has shown that parental involvement and monitoring reduces substance use among adolescents (Ramirez et al., 2004). Thus, many prevention pro- grams focus upon family interventions (Spoth et al., 2004) with good success.  extracurricular Strategies   Various extracurricular activi- ties and youth programs have the potential to reduce problem behaviors like alcohol and drug use, school dropouts, violence, and juvenile delinquency (Scales & Leffert, 1999). These pro- grams may be especially beneficial for high-risk teens who are unsupervised outside of school or who, because of poverty, may not have access to opportunities like sports, music, or other programs available to middle-class youth.  Internet-Based Intervention Programs   One recent study (Schwinn et al., 2010) examined adolescent girls (seventh through ninth grade) who were given an online test battery and 12 sessions of gender-specific drug prevention strategies. At follow-up, girls receiving the Internet intervention program reported lower rates of use for alcohol and drugs compared with the control sample.  comprehensive Prevention Strategies   A consensus seems to be developing in the field that the most effective way to prevent complex problems like adolescent alcohol and other drug use is through the use of multicomponent programs that combine aspects of the various strategies described previously (Stigler, Neusel, and Perry, 2011). Typically, classroom curricula are used as the core component to which other strategies (e.g., parent programs, mass media, extracurricular activities, and community strategies to reduce access to alcohol via enforcement of age of drinking laws) are added. Partly because of this lack of positive results for alcohol use, a team of University of Minnesota researchers developed Project Northland—an exemplary research-based set of interventions that aims to delay the onset of drinking in young adolescents, reduce alcohol use among those already drinking, and limit the number of alcohol-related problems during adolescence. Project Northland included multiple years of behavioral cur- ricula, parental involvement and education, peer leadership opportunities, community task forces, and community-wide media campaigns (e.g., Perry et al., 1996, 2002). Interventions started with students in the sixth grade and continued until high school graduation. The program included peer-led and activity- driven learning strategies that involved students, parents, teach- ers, and community members in support of “no use” messages, while at the same time promoting alcohol-free norms for youth, providing fun alternatives to alcohol use, and reducing youth access to alcohol. Innovative activities and games were used to ensure high participation rates in the program, and comprehen- sive teacher and peer-leader trainings were core features (go to http://www.hazelden.org/web/go/projectnorthland for descrip- tions of the program). The success of prevention programs has come to the attention of educators, and a number of efforts are under way to “export” these laboratory programs for broader use in America’s schools. Perhaps the most noteworthy is the National Registry of Effective Prevention Programs (NREPP), a program of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (http://www.samhsa.gov). However, the jury  Why do you think peer programs, like those offered at the Boys and Girls Clubs, tend to be more successful than adult-driven programs in getting children and adolescents to avoid drug and alcohol abuse?  Recognizing the huge market potential of teenagers, advertisers exploit the tremendous value that the appearance of sophistication has for this age group. Some efforts have been aimed at deglamorizing these mes- sages by showing ads that graphically depict the negative aspects alco- hol and drug use, like the antismoking ad on the right.
is still out on the relative success of the various substance- abuse prevention programs at reducing alcohol and drug problems in adolescents. For example, an effort to implement the Northland project in a large Midwestern inner city where problems with gangs, violence, drug dealing, and housing were perceived as more pressing than underage drinking did not have the positive outcomes that were obtained in the more rural environment of northern Minnesota (Komro et al., 2008). It will take time and further research efforts to determine which of the strategies are superior to others in reducing alcohol and drug problems in adolescents, and in which settings.  Indicated Interventions  Indicated intervention emphasizes the early detection and prompt treatment of maladaptive behavior in a person’s fam- ily and community setting. In some cases—for example, in a crisis or after a disaster (Garakani et al., 2004; see the discus- sion on crisis intervention in Chapter 5)—indicated prevention involves immediate and relatively brief intervention to prevent any long-term behavioral consequences of the traumatic events (Raphael & Wooding, 2004).  Inpatient Mental Health Treatment in Contemporary Society  Mental disorders are common in the United States. An esti- mated 26.2 percent of Americans ages 18 and older, or about one in four adults, suffer from a diagnosable mental disorder in a given year (Kessler, Chiu et al., 2005). Over 57.7 million people ages 18 and older suffer from one or more psychiat- ric disorders. Of these, approximately 2.4 million American adults, or about 1.1 percent of the population ages 18 and older in a given year, are diagnosed as having schizophrenia. While most people experiencing mental health problems seek or obtain help in an outpatient program, some individuals require admission to an inpatient treatment program because of perceived danger they experience in their daily lives. Inpa- tient admission to a psychiatric hospital can be a significant step that is taken as a means of protecting the individual or those close to her or him from harm by providing a secure environment to allow the patient to recover from her or his extreme symptoms.  the Mental hospital as a therapeutic community  In cases where individuals might be considered danger- ous to themselves or others (Richards et al., 1997) or where their symptoms are so severe that they are unable to care for themselves in the community, psychiatric hospitaliza- tion may be necessary in order to prevent the development of further problems and the individual’s further psychologi- cal deterioration. Most of the traditional forms of therapy that we discussed in  6 may, of course, be used in a residential or inpatient hospital setting. In addition, in many mental hospitals, these techniques are supplemented by efforts to make the hospital environment itself a “therapeutic community” (Kennard, 2004). That is, the social environ- ment is manipulated to provide the patient with the greatest benefit. All the ongoing activities of the hospital are brought into the total treatment program, and the environment, or milieu, is a crucial aspect of the therapy. This approach is thus often referred to as   milieu therapy   (Petti, 2010; Zimmer- man, 2004). Three general therapeutic principles guide this approach to treatment:  1.   Staff expectations are clearly communicated to patients. Both positive and negative feedback are used to encourage appropriate verbalizations and actions by patients.  2.   Patients are encouraged to become involved in all decisions made, and in all actions taken, concerning them. A self-care, do-it-yourself attitude prevails.  3.   All patients belong to social groups on the ward. The group cohesiveness that results gives the patients support and encouragement, and the related process of group pressure helps shape their behavior in positive ways. In a therapeutic community, as few restraints as possible are placed on patients’ freedom, and patients are encouraged to take responsibility for their behavior and participate actively in their treatment programs. Open wards permit patients to use the grounds and premises. Self-government programs give patients responsibility for managing their own affairs and those of the ward. All hospital personnel are expected to treat the patients as human beings who merit consideration and courtesy. The interaction among patients—whether in group therapy sessions, social events, or other activities—is planned in such a way as to be of therapeutic benefit. In fact, it is becoming apparent that often the most beneficial aspect of a therapeutic community is the interaction among the patients themselves. Differences in social roles and backgrounds may make empathy between staff and patients difficult, but fellow patients have been there—they have had similar problems and breakdowns and have experienced the anxiety and humiliation of being labeled “mentally ill” and being hospitalized. Constructive rela- tionships frequently develop among patients in a supportive, encouraging milieu. However, although   residential treatment  has improved over time, such treatment for children and adoles- cents continues to face challenges. Another successful method for helping patients take increased responsibility for their own behavior is the use of
social-learning programs . Such programs normally make use of learning principles and techniques such as token economies (see  6) to shape more socially acceptable behavior (Corrigan, 1995, 1997; Mariotto et al., 2002; Paul et al., 1997). Although a strong case can be made for the use of psychi- atric hospitalization in stabilizing adjustment of people living with psychiatric disorders (Glick & Tandon, 2009), a persistent concern about hospitalization is that the mental hospital may become a permanent refuge from the world. Over the past four decades, considerable effort has been devoted to reducing the population of inpatients by closing hospitals and treat- ing patients who have mental disorders as outpatients. This effort, which is often referred to as   deinstitutionalization , was initiated to prevent the negative effects, for many psychiatric patients, of being confined to a mental hospital for long periods of time as well as to lower health care costs. To keep the focus on returning patients to the community and on preventing their return to the institution, contemporary hospital staffs try to establish close ties with patients’ families and communities and to provide them with positive expectations about the patients’ recovery. The rise of the biological therapies described in  6 has meant that between 70 and 90 percent of patients diag- nosed with psychosis and admitted to mental hospitals can now be discharged within a few weeks, or at most a few months. Even where disorders have become chronic, effective treatment methods have been developed. In one of the most extensive and well-controlled studies of chronic hospitalized patients, Paul and Lentz (1977) compared the relative effectiveness of three treat- ment approaches:  1.   Milieu therapy focuses on structuring a patient’s environ- ment to provide clear communication of expectations and to get the patient involved in the treatment. One major goal is to encourage the patient to participate in the therapeutic community through the group process.  2.   A social-learning treatment program, organized around learning principles and using a rigorously programmed token economy system, with ward staff as reinforcing agents. Undesirable behavior was not reinforced, whereas the accumulation of many tokens through effective functioning made a patient eligible for attractive amenities not normally available in public mental hospitals.  3.   Traditional mental hospital treatments including pharmaco- therapy, occupational therapy, recreational therapy, activity therapy, and individual or group therapy. No systematic application of milieu therapy or the social-learning program was given to this group. The treatment project covered a period of 6 years: an initial phase of staff training, patient assessment, and baseline record- ing; a treatment phase; an aftercare phase; and a long (year and a half ) follow-up. The changes targeted included resocialization, learning new roles, and reducing or eliminating bizarre behavior. There were 28 chronic schizophrenic patients in each treatment group matched for age, sex, socioeconomic level, symptoms, and duration of hospitalization. The results of the study were impressive. Both milieu therapy and the social-learning program produced significant improvement in overall functioning and resulted in more successful hospital releases than the traditional hospital care. The behaviorally based social-learning program, however, was clearly superior to the more diffuse program of milieu therapy, as evidenced by the fact that over 90 percent of the released patients from the social-learning program remained continuously in the community, compared with 70 percent of the released patients who had had milieu therapy. The figure for the traditional treatment program was less than 50 percent. Despite the promise of the token economy approach, emu- lating as it does certain “real-world” principles of exchange that the patient will face outside the institution, it has not enjoyed wide public acceptance (Mariotto et al., 2002). Many feel that it is cruel and inhumane to expect mental health patients to govern their behavior in accordance with a prescribed schedule of rein- forcements. One might ask, however, whether it is more humane to consign the patient to the status of a passive and helpless recipient of whatever the environment has to offer, which in many institutional settings is not very much. Is that truly the message we want to convey about the patient’s relationship to his or her environment? Probably not, especially in light of the considerable evidence that most chronic mental health patients are surprisingly adept at making successful adaptations that are within their range of control.  aftercare Programs  Even where hospitalization has successfully modified maladap- tive behavior and a patient has learned needed occupational and interpersonal skills, readjustment in the community following release may still be difficult (Seidman, 2003; Thornicroft & Tansella, 2000). Many studies have shown that in the past, up to 45 percent of individuals with schizophrenia have been readmit- ted within the first year after their discharge. Community-based treatment programs, now referred to as “aftercare programs,” are live-in facilities that serve as a home base for former patients as they make the transition back to adequate functioning in the community. Typically, community-based facilities are run not by professional mental health personnel but by the residents themselves. Aftercare programs can help smooth the transition from institutional to community life and reduce the number of relapses. However, some individuals do not function well in aftercare programs. Owen and colleagues (1997) found that clients who were likely to hold unskilled employment, to have nonpsychotic symptoms, to have committed a crime, or to be more transient tended to be noncompliant in aftercare programs. The investigators conclude that many of the discharged patients did not “fit” the services typically offered to released psychiatric
inpatients. Those with less severe symptoms may fail because they appear to aftercare staff as not needing much help; most services are geared to those patients who exhibit more extreme symptoms. Sometimes aftercare includes a “halfway” period in which a released patient makes a gradual return to the outside world in what were formerly termed “halfway houses.” Aftercare programs do not always live up to their name, however. Levy and Kershaw (2001) disclose a number of problems in which relevant treat- ment was not made available and staff did not provide a secure environment. Although some patients continue to have mental health problems including suicide attempts (Fenton et al., 1997), and many have trouble gaining the acceptance and support of the community (Fairweather, 1994; Seidman, 2003), efforts to treat severely disturbed patients in the community are often very successful.  Deinstitutionalization  The population of psychiatric patients in the United States has shrunk considerably over the past 40 years. Between 1967 and 2007, the number of people in state mental hospitals dropped 81 percent (Scott et al., 2008). The deinstitutionalization move- ment, which involves closing down mental hospitals and treating persons with severe mental disorders in community programs, has not been limited to the United States. On the contrary, there has been a worldwide trend to shift the care of mental patients from inpatient hospitals to community-based programs (Emerson, 2004; Honkonen et al., 2003). Deinstitutionalization has been a source of considerable controversy. Some authorities consider the emptying of mental hospitals a positive expression of society’s desire to free previ- ously confined persons, maintaining that deinstitutionalized patients show significant improvement compared with those who remain hospitalized (Newton et al., 2000; Reinharz et al., 2000). Others, however, speak of the “abandonment” of chronic patients to a cruel and harsh existence (Grob, 2008), which for many includes homelessness, violent victimization (Walsh et al., 2003), or suicide (Goldney, 2003). Many citizens, too, complain of being harassed, intimidated, and frightened by obviously disturbed persons wandering the streets of their neighborhoods. In an effort to address concerns of patients, some professionals and community members alike have lobbied to call attention to mental health challenges brought about by deinstitutionalization (Rosenberg & Rosenberg, 2006). Some of the reduction in mental health services in recent years has come about because of changes in the health care system. (See the Unresolved Issues section at the end of this chapter.) The planned community efforts to fill the gaps in service never really materialized at effective levels (Lamb, 1998). A number of factors have interacted to alter the pattern of mental hospital admissions and discharges in recent years. Antipsychotic drugs have made it possible for many patients who would otherwise have required confinement to live in the community, but not all mental health problems can be managed with medication. In addition, changing treatment philosophy and the desire to eliminate mental institutions were bolstered by the assumption that society wanted and could afford to provide better community-based care for chronic patients outside of large mental hospitals. In theory, closing the public mental hospitals seemed work- able. The plan was to open many community-based mental health centers that would provide continuing care to the resi- dents of hospitals after discharge. Residents would be given welfare funds (supposedly at less cost to the government than maintaining large mental hospitals) and would be administered medication to keep them stabilized until they could obtain con- tinuing care. Many patients would be discharged to home and family; others would be placed in smaller, home-like board-and- care facilities or nursing homes. Unforeseen problems arose, however, and in many cases, homeless shelters in metropolitan communities have become a “makeshift alternative” to inpatient mental health care (Haugland et al., 1997). Many residents of mental institutions have no families or homes to go to; board-and-care facilities are often substandard; and the community mental health centers have often been ill prepared and insufficiently funded to provide needed services for chronic patients, particularly as national funding priorities shifted during the 1980s (Humphreys & Rappaport, 1993). Many patients are not carefully selected for discharge and are not ready for community living, and many  Aftercare facilities do not always provide the safe refuge promised. Homeless people often live in large cities under austere conditions, as noted in this photograph, that resemble those seen in mental institutions several decades ago.
of those who are discharged are not followed up sufficiently or often enough to ensure their successful adaptation outside the hospital. In addition, some research has suggested that deinsti- tutionalization has increased the rates of suicide among people with mental illness (Yoon & Bruckner, 2009). One important court case ( Albright v .   Abington Memorial Hospital , 1997) involved charges that the hospital failed to pro- vide sufficient care for a seriously disturbed woman who later killed herself. Countless patients have been discharged to fates harsher than the conditions in any of the hospitals. The follow- ing case illustrates the situation.  From Institution to Homelessness   Dave B., 49 years old, had been hospitalized for 25 years in a state mental hospital. When the hospital was scheduled for phaseout, many of the patients, particularly those who were regressed or aggressive, were transferred to another state hospital. Dave was a borderline intellectually disabled man who had periodic epi- sodes of psychosis. At the time of the hospital closing, however, he was not hallucinating and was “reasonably intact.” Dave was considered to be one of the “less disturbed” residents because his psychotic behavior was less pronounced and he presented no dangerous problems. He was discharged to a board-and-care facility (actually an old hotel where most of the residents were former inpatients). At first, Dave seemed to fit in well at the facil- ity; mostly he sat in his room or in the outside hallway, and he caused no trouble for the caretakers. Two weeks after he had arrived, however, he wandered off the hotel grounds and was missing for several days. The police eventually found him living in the city dump. He had apparently stopped taking his medication, and when he was discovered he was regressed and catatonic. He was readmitted to a state hospital.  Research on the effects of deinstitutionalization has been mixed. Some reports have noted positive benefits of briefer hospitalization (Honkonen et al., 2003; Rauktis, 2001), and some data suggest that deinstitutionalization appears not to be associated with an increased risk of homicide by people who are mentally ill (Simpson et al., 2004). However, others have reported problems with discharged patients and point to failures in programs to deinstitutionalize mental patients (Chan et al., 2001; Leff, 2001). There is some recent indication that inpatient psychiatric hospitalization may be increasing because of the failures to pro- vide adequate mental health care for patients in need of mental health services in the community (Marcotty, 2004). A similar increase in the number of people being hospitalized has been reported in the United Kingdom (Priebe & Turner, 2003). The full extent of problems created by deinstitutionaliza- tion is not precisely known, partly because there has been little rigorous follow-up on patients discharged from mental hospitals. Such research investigations are difficult to conduct because the patients are transient and hard to track over time. Certainly, not all homeless people are former mental patients, but dein- stitutionalization has contributed substantially to the number of homeless people (Whitaker, 2009) and to the number of mentally ill people in prison (Markowitz, 2006). On the positive side, a study by Nelson and colleagues (2007) concluded that there has been a significant reduction in homelessness and sig- nificant improvements in “well-being” outcomes resulting from recent programs that provide permanent housing and support for the homeless. For example, Padgett, and colleagues (2006) showed that assertive community treatment and programs to reduce harm can be successful in producing housing stability and reduction in the trauma of homelessness.  in review  •   What are some strategies for biological, psychosocial, and socio- cultural universal interventions?  •   Define the term selective intervention. What selective interven- tion programs have shown promise in helping prevent teenage alcohol and drug abuse?  •   What is indicated intervention?  •   What is milieu therapy?  •   What problems have resulted from deinstitutionalization?  Controversial Legal Issues and the Mentally Ill  A number of important issues are related to the legal status of mentally ill people—the subject matter of   forensic psychology  or   forensic psychiatry —and they center on the rights of patients and the rights of members of society to be protected from disturbed individuals (see Drogin et al., 2011 for a compre- hensive overview). For a survey of some of the legal rights that mentally ill people have gained over the years, see The World Around Us box on the following page.  civil commitment  Persons with psychological problems or behaviors that are so extreme and severe as to pose a threat to themselves or others may require protective confinement. Those who commit crimes, whether or not they have a psychological disorder, are dealt with primarily through the judicial system—arrest, court trial, and, if convicted, possible confinement in a penal institution. People who are judged to be potentially dangerous because of their psychological state may, after   civil commitment   procedures, be confined in a mental institution. The steps in the commitment process vary slightly depending on state law, the locally available community mental health resources, and the nature of the prob- lem. For example, commitment procedures for a person who is intellectually disabled are different from those for a person whose problem is alcohol abuse.
There is a distinction between voluntary hospitalization and involuntary commitment. In most cases, people accept voluntary commitment or hospitalization. In these cases, they can, with sufficient notice, leave the hospital if they wish. But in cases where a person may be considered dangerous or is unable to pro- vide for her or his own care, the need for involuntary commit- ment may arise (Zerman & Schwartz, 1998). Being mentally ill is not sufficient grounds for placing a person in a mental institution against his or her will. Although procedures vary somewhat from state to state, several conditions beyond mental illness usually must be met before formal invol- untary commitment can occur (Simon & Aaronson, 1988). In brief, such individuals must be judged to be  • Dangerous to themselves or to others and/or • Incapable of providing for their basic physical needs and/or • Unable to make responsible decisions about hospitaliza - tion and  • In need of treatment or care in a hospital  Typically, filing a petition for a commitment hearing is the first step in the process of committing a person involun- tarily. This petition is usually filed by a concerned individual such as a relative, physician, or mental health professional. When such a petition is filed, a judge appoints two exam- iners to evaluate the proposed patient. In Minnesota, for example, one examiner must be a physician (not necessarily a psychiatrist); the other can be a psychiatrist or a psycholo- gist. The patient is asked to appear voluntarily for psychiatric examination before the commitment hearing. The hear- ing must be held within 14 days, which can be extended to 30 more days if good cause for the extension can be shown.  the WOrLd around us  Important Court Decisions for Patient Rights  S everal important court decisions have helped establish certain basic rights for individuals suffering from mental disorders. But they have also curtailed these rights, amid continuing controversy.  •   right to treatment.   In 1972 a U.S. district court in Alabama rendered a landmark decision in the case of   Wyatt v. Stickney . It ruled that a mentally ill person or a person with mental retardation had a right to receive treatment. Since that decision, the state of Alabama has increased its budget for the treatment of mental illness and mental retardation by 300 percent (see Winick, 1997).  •   freedom from custodial confinement.   In 1975 the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the principle that patients have a right to freedom from custodial confinement if they are not dangerous to themselves or others and if they can safely survive outside of custody. In   Donaldson v. O’Connor , the defendants were required to pay Donaldson $10,000 for having kept him in custody without providing treatment.  •   right to compensation for Work.   In 1973 a U.S. district court ruled in the case of   Souder v. Brennan   (the secretary of labor) that a patient in a nonfederal mental institution who performed work must be paid according to the Fair Labor Standards Act. Although a 1978 Supreme Court ruling nullified the part of the lower court’s decision dealing with state hospitals, the ruling still applies to mentally ill persons and patients with mental retardation in private facilities.  •   right to live in a community.   In 1974 a U.S. district court decided, in the case of   Staff v. Miller , that released state mental hospital patients have a right to live in “adult homes” in the community.  •   right to less restrictive treatment.   In 1975 a U.S. district court issued a landmark decision in the case of   Dixon   v.  Weinberger . The ruling established the right of individuals to receive treatment in less restrictive facilities than mental institutions.  •   right to legal counsel at commitment hearings.   The Wisconsin State Supreme Court decided in 1976, in the case of   Memmel v. Mundy , that an individual has the right to legal counsel during the commitment process.  •   right to refuse treatment.   Several court decisions have provided rulings, and some states have enacted legislation, permitting patients to refuse certain treatments such as electroconvulsive therapy and psychosurgery.  •   the need for confinement Must Be Shown by clear, convincing evidence.   In 1979 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled, in the case of   Addington v. Texas , that a person’s need to be kept in an institution must be based on demonstrable evidence.  •   limitation on Patients’ rights to refuse Psychotropic Medication.   In 1990 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled, in  Washington v. Harper , that a Washington State prison could override a disturbed prisoner’s refusal of psychotropic medications. This decision was based on a finding that the prison’s review process adequately protected the patient’s rights. We see in this instance that changes in the national political climate can reverse prior trends that favored patients’ rights. Sources: Grounds (2000), Mental Health Law Project (1987), Mrad & Watson (2011), Saks (2004), and Swartz, Swanson, & Elbogen (2004).
The law requires that the court-appointed examiners inter- view the patient before the hearing. When a person is committed to a mental hospital for treat- ment, the hospital must report to the court within 60 days on whether the person needs to be confined even longer. If the hospital gives no report, the patient must be released. If the hos- pital indicates that the person needs further treatment, then the commitment period becomes indeterminate, subject to periodic reevaluations. Because the decision to commit a person is based on the conclusions of others about the person’s capabilities and her or his potential for dangerous behavior, the civil commitment pro- cess leaves open the possibility of the unwarranted violation of a person’s civil rights. As a consequence, most states have stringent safeguards to ensure that any person who is the subject of a peti- tion for commitment is granted due process, including rights to formal hearings with representation by legal counsel. If there is no time to get a court order for commitment or if there is immi- nent danger, however, the law allows emergency hospitalization without a formal commitment hearing. In such cases, a physician must sign a statement saying that an imminent danger exists. The patient can then be picked up (usually by the police) and detained under a “hold order,” usually not to exceed 72 hours, unless a petition for commitment is filed within that period. Involuntary commitment in a psychiatric facility is largely contingent on a determination that a person is dangerous and requires confinement out of a need to protect himself or herself or society. Once committed, a patient may refuse treatment—a situation that mental health professionals working in psychiatric facilities often face. We will now turn to the important issue of evaluating patients in terms of potential dangerousness. (For a discussion of prisoners who are released from prison and then returned because of other offences, see The World Around Us box on following page.)  assessment of “Dangerousness”  Although most psychiatric patients are not considered danger- ous, some are violent and require close supervision—perhaps confinement until they are no longer dangerous. Rates of assaultiveness vary from setting to setting, but in all reported studies the overall number of assaultive patients is relatively low. An increasing number of clinical researchers in recent years have discovered that a history of violent behavior and some classes of mental disorder appear to be associated with violence (Pinard & Pagani, 2001). Although most disordered people reportedly show no tendency toward violence (Lamberg, 1998), an increased risk of violence appears more likely among some who are experiencing symptoms of psychosis (Hodgins & Lalonde, 1999). The disorders that have an increased risk for violent behavior include schizophrenia, mania, personality disorder, substance abuse, and the rarer conditions of organic brain injury and Huntington’s disease. One study from Finland (Eronen et al., 1996) reported that homicidal behavior among former patients was considerably more frequent among patients with schizophrenia and even more common among patients with antisocial personality or alcoholism. In another study, psy- chiatric patients who abused alcohol (Steadman et al., 1998) were found to be notably violent. Practitioners are often called upon to evaluate the possibility that a patient might be dangerous, and there is some evidence that mental health professionals can contribute to such an assessment (Cunningham & Sorensen, 2007; Quinsey et al., 2006), at least on a short-term basis (Binder, 1999). The determination that a patient is potentially dangerous can be difficult to make (Bauer et al., 2003), yet this is one of the most important responsibilities of professionals working in the fields of law and psychology (Burke, 2010). Scott and colleagues (2010) point out that the accuracy of a clinician’s assessment of future violence is determined by many factors, such as the circumstances of the evaluation and the length of time over which violence is predicted. When asked to perform an evaluation of dangerousness in a client, a clinician has a clear responsibility to try to protect the public from potential violence or other uncontrolled behavior of dangerous patients.  atteMPtS to PreDIct DangeroUSneSS   It is very difficult—for professionals and laypersons alike—to accurately appraise “dangerousness” in some individuals (Heilbrun, 2009). The complex problem of risk assessment or prediction of danger- ousness can be likened to predicting the weather. “Ultimately, the goal of a warning system in mental health law is the same as the goal of a warning system in meteorology: to maximize the number of people who take appropriate and timely actions for the safety of life and property” (Monahan & Steadman, 1997, p. 937).  Prediction of aggressive behavior is an important but not necessarily an easy task to accomplish in our society.
the WOrLd around us  Controversial Not Guilty Pleas: Can Altered Mind States or Personality Disorder Limit Responsibility for a Criminal Act?  I f a person commits a capital offense when his or her consciousness (and reason) is impaired, as in an altered state, should he or she be held responsible for the crime? Can using psychotropic medicine such as Prozac or Zoloft “poison” a person’s mind to such an extreme degree that she or he commits murder? If a murder is committed while someone is heavily “sedated”—for example, with Xanax or Halcion—should that person be released from criminal responsibility because he or she was involuntarily intoxicated with medications prescribed by a health professional? If a person experiences “multiple personalities” and a crime is committed by one personality, should all of the personalities suffer the consequences? These defense strategies are interesting and controversial challenges to today’s legal system.  altereD StateS of conScIoUSneSS  In a civil trial, the jury failed to find the manufacturer of Prozac (Eli Lilly) liable in court action that resulted from a 1989 mass murder allegedly committed “under the influence” of Prozac. The murderer (Joseph Wesbecker), in a rage against his employer, killed 8 people and wounded 12 others before killing himself. Survivors and family members of several people who were killed in the incident filed a suit against Eli Lilly because the killer was taking the drug Prozac at the time of the murders and because the drug was alleged to be responsible for “intoxicat- ing” the assassin and lowering his inhibitions. After a long trial, the jury found in favor of the manufacturer ( Fentress et al. v. Shea Communications et al. , 1990). Courts have generally not considered altered states of consciousness such as being intoxicated on drugs or alcohol sufficient grounds for an insanity defense because of the issue of volition—that is, that the perpetrator of the crime consciously chose to become intoxicated in the first place. However, the question of intoxication by drugs that were taken for the purpose of medication has added a new dimension to the de- fense. This issue has not been fully resolved in the court system.  altereD PerSonalIty StateS  Possibly the most fascinating of controversial insanity pleas are those raised by the phenomenon of dissociative identity disorder (DID), formerly known as multiple personality disorder, which has become a more common diagnosis in recent years. Although some professionals dispute even the existence of such a condition, others find it a plausible argument for a plea of not guilty by reason of insanity (NGRI). The general nature of the problem can be stated quite succinctly: Within a legal system strongly oriented to the precise identification of individual responsibility for acts, what, if any, are the limits of the assignment of responsibility and sanctions for infractions of the law where the same physical space and body are occupied at different times by more than one distinct and legally recognizable person? Consider the following legal dilemmas:  • Who, among various copersonalities, is empowered to sign for  withdrawals from a bank account?  • Are the provisions and obligations of a contract entered  into by one constituent personality binding on all others re- gardless of their particular desires in the matter?  • Does the swearing of an oath, as in court, apply to the en - tire collection of personalities, or must each be sworn indi- vidually if she or he is to testify?  • In the case of a guilty verdict for the criminal act of a given  personality, where other personalities did not acquiesce to the crime, how should punishment be fairly meted out?  • If no constituent personality meets a test of insanity, is it  reasonable and lawful to declare DID itself an instance of insanity?  • Has rape occurred if the copersonalities of a 26-year-old  woman who had acquiesced to intercourse included one or more personalities who had vehemently objected to it? (Such a case was prosecuted in Wisconsin in 1990.)  • And, of course, the most common real-life legal dilemma:  Should an individual, as the primary personality, be held le- gally accountable for, say, a capital crime that evidence sug- gests may have actually been committed surreptitiously, so to speak, by an alter personality? The scenario just mentioned has rather often been the conten- tion underlying a plea of not guilty by reason of insanity. Usually, as in the case of the “Hillside Strangler,” Kenneth Bianchi (con- victed of 12 rapes and murders in California and Washington State), and in the case of a woman who kidnapped a newborn from a hospital and later claimed that an alter personality had actually committed the crime (Appelbaum & Greer, 1994), the plea has failed. On a very few occasions, however, the NGRI plea has worked, as in the well-publicized 1978 case of Ohio res- ident Billy Milligan, who claimed to be host to 10 personalities and was accused of raping four women (New York Times, 1994). The legal maneuvers inspired by the DID construct admittedly have a quality of whimsy about them. It is consequently difficult to convince most juries that the defendant was so taken over by an alter personality who perpetrated the crime that he or she should be absolved of guilt and responsibility.
It is usually easy to determine, after the fact, that a person has demonstrated dangerous behavior, but how well do mental health professionals do in predicting the occurrence of dangerous acts? Not as well as we would like (Edens et al., 2005). Violent acts are particularly difficult to predict because they are appar- ently determined as much by situational circumstances (for example, whether a person is under the influence of alcohol) as by an individual’s personality traits or violent predispositions. One obvious and significantly predictive risk factor is a past history of violence (Burke, 2010; Megargee, 2009), but clini- cians are not always able to unearth this type of background information. As already noted, some types of patients, particularly individuals with active schizophrenia and mania (Hodgins & Lalonde, 1999) and patients with well-entrenched delusions (de Pauw & Szulecka, 1988), are far more likely than others to commit violent acts. Martell and Dietz (1992) reported a study of persons convicted of pushing or attempting to push unsus- pecting victims in front of New York City subway trains and found that most were both psychotic and homeless at the time of the act. Norko and Baranoski (2005) noted that although many studies point to a modest increased risk of violence associated with mental illness, particularly psychosis, other studies have not confirmed these findings. Expert testimony to establish dangerousness or future violence in offenders has become an important part of the U.S. legal sys- tem. However, the prediction of dangerousness is often question- able (Krauss & Lieberman, 2007). Mental health professionals typically overpredict violence and consider felons to be more dan- gerous than they actually are, and usually predict a greater percent- age of clients to be dangerous than actually become involved in violent acts (Megargee, 2009). Such a tendency is of course under- standable from the perspective of the practitioner, considering the potentially serious consequences of releasing a violent individual. It is likely, however, that many innocent patients thereby experi- ence a violation of their civil rights. Given a certain irreducible level of uncertainty in the prediction of violence, it is not obvious how this dilemma can be completely resolved.  the DUty to Protect: IMPlIcatIonS of the taraSoff DecISIon   What should a therapist do upon learn- ing that a patient is planning to harm another person? Can the therapist violate the legally sanctioned confidence of the therapy contract and take action to prevent the patient from committing the act? Today, in most states, the therapist not only can violate confidentiality with impunity but also may be required by law to take action to protect people from the threat of imminent violence against them. In its original form, this requirement was conceived as a duty to warn the prospective victim. The duty-to-warn legal doctrine was given great impetus in a 1976 California court ruling in the case of   Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California et al . (Mills et al., 1987). In this case, Prosenjit Poddar was being seen in outpatient psychother- apy by a psychologist at the university mental health facility. During his treatment, Mr. Poddar indicated that he intended to kill his former girlfriend, Tatiana Tarasoff, when she returned from vacation. Concerned about the threat, the psychologist discussed the case with his supervisors, and they agreed that Poddar was dangerous and should be committed for further observation and treatment. They informed the campus police, who picked up Poddar for questioning, subsequently judged him to be rational, and released him after he promised to leave Ms. Tarasoff alone. Poddar then terminated treatment with the psychologist. About 2 months thereafter, he stabbed Ms. Tarasoff to death. Her parents later sued the University of California and staff members involved in the case for their failure to hospitalize Poddar and their failure to warn Tarasoff about the threat to her life. In due course, the California Supreme Court in 1974 ruled that the defendants were not liable for failing to hospitalize Poddar; it did, however, find them liable for failing to warn the victim. Ironically, Prosenjit Poddar, the criminal, was released on a trial technicality and returned home to India. In a later analysis of the case, Knapp (1980) says that the court ruled that difficulty in determining dangerousness does not exempt a psychotherapist from attempt- ing to protect others when a determination of dangerousness exists. The court acknowledged that confidentiality was impor- tant to the psychotherapeutic relationship but stated that the protection privilege ends where public peril begins. The duty-to-warn ruling—which has come to be known as the   Tarasoff decision —spelled out a therapist’s responsibility in situations where there has been an explicit threat on a specific person’s life, but it left other areas of application unclear. For example, does this ruling apply in cases where a patient threatens to commit suicide, and how might the therapist’s responsibility be met in such a case? What, if anything, should a therapist do when the target of violence is not clearly named—for example, when global threats are made? Would the duty-to-warn ruling hold up in other states? Or might deleterious effects on patient– therapist relationships outweigh any public benefit to be derived from the duty to warn? Responding to mounting pressures for  Student Seung Hui- Cho, the mass mur- derer responsible for the Virginia Tech massacre in 2007, was known to have severe mental health prob- lems and was consid- ered to be potentially dangerous.
clarification, chiefly from professional mental health organiza- tions, the California Supreme Court in 1976 issued a revised opinion called the “duty to warn doctrine.” In this decision the court ruled that the duty was to protect, rather than specifically to warn, the prospective victim, but it left vague the question of how this duty might be discharged—presumably in order to give practitioners latitude in dealing with danger to third parties. Meanwhile, however, numerous other lawsuits in other jurisdic- tions have been filed and adjudicated in inconsistent and confus- ing ways (Mills et al., 1987). The many perplexing issues for practitioners left in the wake of Tarasoff were partly resolved, at least in California, by the legislature’s adoption in 1985 of a new state law essentially establishing that the duty to protect is discharged if the thera- pist makes “reasonable efforts” to inform potential victims and an appropriate law enforcement agency of the pending threat. The Tarasoff ruling was extended in 2004 ( Ewing v. Goldstein , 2004) when the California Court of Appeals ruled that a communication from a patient’s family member consti- tutes a “patient communication” that can trigger the therapist’s duty to protect. In other court jurisdictions, however, the inconsistent judi- cial fallout from Tarasoff has continued and has been a source of much anxiety and confusion among mental health profession- als, many of whom continue to believe, on ethical and clinical grounds, that strict confidentiality is an absolute and invio- lable trust. Some states—for example, Maryland, Texas, and Pennsylvania—have explicitly affirmed that position, abandon- ing Tarasoff altogether, while 23 states impose a duty to warn, although the criteria for this typically vary (Barbee et al., 2007). There has been considerable debate over the need and utility of the Tarasoff ruling, and some authorities have raised questions about its survivability as a law (Quattrocchi & Schopp. 2005). Official professional ethics codes, such as that of the American Psychological Association (2002), normally compel compliance with relevant laws regardless of one’s personal predi- lections. Where the law is itself vague or equivocal, however, as it often is in this area, there is much room for individual inter- pretation (Kachigian & Felthous, 2004). Today there is consid- erable confusion among practitioners about their responsibility with regard to rules of their state with respect to Tarasoff ruling. A recent survey of clinicians found that 76 percent of clinicians failed to correctly identify their state’s duty-to-protect law from a multiple-choice list (Pabian et al., 2009). Therapists are at greater risk of a lawsuit for failing to deal with risk of danger posed by some clients (Caudill, 2009).  the Insanity Defense  Some people who are being tried for murder use the   insanity defense —also known as the   NGRI plea   (“not guilty by reason of insanity”)—in an attempt to escape the legally prescribed consequences of their crimes (Chappell, 2010; Sadoff & Dattilo, 2011). These defendants claim that they were not legally responsible for their criminal acts. In technical legal terms, they invoke the ancient doctrine that their acts, while guilty ones ( actus rea ), lacked moral blameworthiness because they were not intentional since the defendants did not pos- sess their full mental faculties at the time of the crime and did not “know what they were doing” ( mens rea )—the underly- ing assumption being that “insanity” somehow precludes or absolves the harboring of a guilty intent. One of the most notorious uses of the not guilty by reason of insanity plea in American history was in the case of Jeffrey Dahmer, on trial for the murder, dismemberment, and cannibalization of 15 men in Milwaukee. In the Dahmer case, the planned insan- ity defense proved unsuccessful, which is the usual outcome (Steadman et al., 1993). By contrast, attorneys for John Hinckley, who shot President Reagan and his press secretary, James Brady, in early 1981, successfully pleaded NGRI. (See the case study on p. 597.) The outcome of the Hinckley case was different in a number of important respects because the jury in this instance considered the defendant to be acting “outside of reason” and found him  Jeffrey Dahmer was torturing and drowning cats and dogs by age 7. He never heard voices or broke with reality. He tricked his victims into being handcuffed (they thought it was part of a sexual game) and then dripped acid into their flesh and skulls, rendering them zombies. Then he would engage them sexually and would occasionally cannibalize them. Dahmer was charged with and later convicted of murder after body parts of sev- eral young men were found in his apartment. While serving his time in prison, he was bludgeoned to death by a psychotic killer in 1994.
not guilty by reason of insanity. At trial in June 1982, Hinckley was acquitted on those grounds. This verdict immediately unleashed a storm of public protest and generated widespread, often hasty attempts to reform the law to make the NGRI defense a less attractive option to defendants and their attorneys. Hinckley himself was committed to the care of a federally oper- ated, high-security mental hospital, to be involuntarily detained there until such time as his disorder remits sufficiently that his release would not constitute a danger to himself or others. He remains incarcerated; however, under a 1999 federal appeals court ruling, Hinckley has been able to take supervised day trips off hospital grounds, and most recently was allowed to spend several weeks at his mother’s home. However, his “recovery” continues to be questioned. Psychiatric testimony (Associated Press, 2003) has indicated that Hinckley still suffers from the same narcissistic personality disorder that drove him to shoot Reagan and three others in 1981.  Hinckley’s Successful Insanity Plea   On March 30, 1981, in an apparent scheme to attract the attention of actress Jodie Foster, with whom he was obsessed, John Hinckley, Jr., shot six bullets at President Ronald Reagan in an assassination attempt. President Reagan was seriously injured, as was Press Secretary James Brady. At the end of his trial in 1982, Hinckley was found not guilty by reason of insanity. Since his trial, Hinckley has been confined to St. Elizabeth’s Hospital in Washington, DC. After what seemed to be significant improvement in his mental health, Hinckley was allowed unsu- pervised visits in April 2000, but these visits were revoked when guards discovered a smuggled book on Jodie Foster in his room.  Releasing Hinckley from custody would almost certainly bring forth another public outcry demanding abolition or limita- tion of the insanity defense. This unfortunate public outrage at all insanity defense pleas results from a persistent failure of legal scholars to examine critically and rigorously the guilt-absolving insanity construct and the   mens rea   doctrine from which it derives. In recent years the use of the NGRI defense in trials where the defendant’s life is at stake has been surrounded by contro- versy, largely owing to the uproar created by the outcome of the Hinckley trial (Steadman et al., 1993). Some have contended that the objection to the insanity defense in capital crimes might reflect negative social attitudes toward the insane (Perlin, 1996). There has been some concern, especially in cases of high visibility, that guilty defendants may feign mental disorder and hence avoid criminal responsibility. Good defense attorneys are of course aware of this public cynicism, which is likely to be shared by juries. They attempt to counteract it in various ways, often by portraying their purportedly “insane at the time of the act” clients as having been themselves victims of heinous and traumatic acts at an earlier time in their lives. Some of them undoubtedly were victimized, but the strategy of creating sym- pathy while offering a plausible explanation for the “insane” act would have a compelling attraction in any case. On the other hand, the insanity defense is often not employed where it is appropriate, as it would have been, for example, in two high- visibility cases: those of John Salvi (the abortion clinic assassin) and Theodore Kaczynski (the Unabomber). Apparently neither defendant wanted his mental state to be a part of the proceed- ings. Severe delusional disorder is likely to have played a sig- nificant role in both of their crimes. (There have been notable efforts to fake the insanity defense to avoid punishment; see the following case study).  Detected Faking of the Insanity Defense   Michael McDermott testified that Michael the Archangel had sent him on a mission to prevent the Holocaust when he gunned down seven coworkers on December 26, 2000. McDermott also stated that he believed he was soulless and that by killing he would earn a soul. McDermott claimed to have been raped by a neighbor when he was a young boy and had a history of paranoia and suicide attempts. Despite this claim of insanity, a jury found McDermott guilty in the shooting deaths of his seven coworkers. The prosecution argued that McDermott was motivated to kill because his employer was about to deduct from his wages back taxes owed to the IRS. Evidence seized from his computer showed that McDermott had researched how to fake being mentally ill. McDermott is currently serving seven consecutive life sen- tences for his crimes.
In some cases in some states, individuals with psycho- sis who fail to meet the standards set for the NGRI plea and are convicted of murder can receive the death sentence even though they were actually psychologically disturbed at the time of the crime and remain so as the execution approaches. An appeals process can be effective at showing that there may be extenuating circumstances that warrant softening the sentence on grounds that the death penalty would be cruel and unusual punishment because of the person’s severe mental health problems or mental retardation. Pirelli and colleagues (2011) conducted an analysis of the results of 68 studies that had been published between 1967 and 2008 that compared competent and incompetent defendants on a number of variables. The most robust findings were that defendants who were diagnosed with a psychotic disorder were about eight times more likely to be found incompetent than defendants without a psychotic disorder diagnosis. The likelihood of being found incompetent was approximately double for unemployed defendants as com- pared to employed defendants. Defendants who had a previous psychiatric hospitalization were about twice more likely to be found not guilty by reason of insanity than those without a hospitalization history. There have been cases in which a failed use of the NGRI plea led to greater punishment. In one recent case ( United States v. Batista , 2007) a defendant in a murder trial intention- ally feigned mental illness in an effort to avoid prison. His charade was discovered and he actually received an enhanced sentence after the trial because of his abuse of mental health pro- tections in the legal system. Despite some features that make it an appealing option to consider, especially when the undisputed facts are strongly aligned against the defendant, the NGRI defense has actually been employed quite rarely—in less than 2 percent of capital cases in the United States over time (Lymburner & Roesch, 1999; Steadman et al., 1993). Studies have confirmed, however, that in some jurisdictions, persons acquitted of crimes by reason of insanity spend less time, on the whole, in a psychiatric hos- pital than persons who are convicted of crimes spend in prison (Lymburner & Roesch, 1999) even though the determination that they are no longer dangerous might be difficult to ascer- tain. In addition, states differ widely in the amount of time that persons found not guilty by reason of insanity are actually con- fined. For example, one study by Callahan and Silver (1998) reported that in the states of Ohio and Maryland nearly all persons acquitted as NGRI have been released within 5 years, whereas in Connecticut and New York conditional release has been much more difficult to obtain. The rearrest rates for freed NGRI claimants vary, with some studies reporting rates as high as 50 percent (Callahan & Silver, 1998; Wiederanders et al., 1997). Monson and colleagues (2001) conducted a follow-up of 125 NGRI acquittees and found a similarly high rearrest rate. These investigators reported that persons discharged to live with their family of origin or to live alone or in semi-inde- pendent living were more likely to maintain their conditional release and not reoffend. These investigators also reported that such factors as minority status, comorbid substance abuse, and prior criminal history were associated with return to custody after release. One recent study in which an active community treatment program was implemented reported low rearrest rates (1.4 percent) and moderate rehospitalization rates (14 percent) (Parker, 2004). Up to this point in the discussion, we have used the term  insanity defense   loosely. We must now become more attentive to the many precise legal nuances involved. Established precedents that define the insanity defense are as follows:  1.   The M’Naghten Rule (1843).   Under this ruling, which is often referred to as the “knowing right from wrong” rule, people are assumed to be sane unless it can be proved that at the time of committing the act they were laboring under such a defect of reason (from a disease of the mind) that they did not know the nature and quality of the act they were doing—or, if they did know they were committing the act, they did not know that what they were doing was wrong.  2.   The Irresistible Impulse Rule (1887).   A second precedent in the NGRI defense is the doctrine of the “irresistible im- pulse.” This view holds that accused persons might not be responsible for their acts—even when they knew that what they were doing was wrong (according to the M’Naghten rule)—if they had lost the power to choose between right
and wrong. That is, they could not avoid doing the act in question because they were compelled beyond their will to commit the act.  3.   The Durham Rule.   In 1954, Judge David Bazelon, in a decision of the U.S. Court of Appeals, broadened the insan- ity defense further. Bazelon did not believe that the previous precedents allowed for a sufficient application of established scientific knowledge of mental illness and proposed a test that would be based on this knowledge. Under this rule, which is often referred to as the “product test,” the accused is not criminally responsible if her or his unlawful act was the product of mental disease or mental defect.  4.   The American Law Institute (ALI) Standard (1962).   Often referred to as the “substantial capacity test” for insanity, this test combines the cognitive aspect of M’Naghten with the volitional focus of irresistible impulse in holding that the perpetrator is not legally responsible if at the time of the act he or she, owing to mental disease or defect, lacked “substantial capacity” either to appreciate the act’s criminal character or to conform his or her behavior to the law’s requirements.  5.   The Federal Insanity Defense Reform ACT (IDRA).   Adopt- ed by Congress in 1984 as the standard for the insanity defense to be applied in all federal jurisdictions, this act abolished the volitional element of the ALI standard and modified the cognitive standard to read “unable to appreci- ate,” thus bringing the definition quite close to M’Naghten. IDRA also specified that the mental disorder involved must be a severe one and shifted the burden of proof from the prosecution to the defense. That is, the defense must clearly and convincingly establish the defendant’s insanity, in con- trast to the prior requirement that the prosecution clearly and convincingly demonstrate the defendant to have been sane when the prohibited act was committed. This shifting of the burden of proof for the insanity defense, by the way, had been instituted by many states in the wake of the Hinckley acquittal. The intent of this reform was to discour- age use of the insanity defense, and it proved quite effective in altering litigation practices in the intended direction (Steadman et al., 1993). At the present time, most states and the District of Columbia subscribe to a version of either the ALI or the more restrictive M’Naghten standard. New York is a special case. It uses a version of M’Naghten to define insanity, with the burden of proof on the defense, but an elaborate procedural code has been enacted to promote fairness in outcomes while ensuring lengthy and restric- tive hospital commitment for defendants judged to be danger- ous; this approach appears to have worked well (Steadman et al., 1993). In some jurisdictions, when an insanity plea is filed, the case is submitted for pretrial screening, which includes a psychiat- ric evaluation, review of records, and appraisal of criminal respon- sibility. In one study of 190 defendants who entered a plea of not criminally responsible, the following outcomes were obtained: 105 were judged to be criminally responsible, charges against 34 were dropped, and 8 defendants were agreed by both the pros- ecution and the defense to be insane and not responsible. A total of 134 withdrew their insanity pleas (Janofsky et al., 1996). The insanity defense was noted in this study to be somewhat of a “rich man’s defense” in that such cases involved private attorneys rather than public defenders. Silver (1995) found that the successful use of the NGRI defense varied widely among states. In addition, Silver reports that the length of confinement was related more to the judged seriousness of the crime than to whether the person was employ- ing the NGRI defense. One study (Cirinclone et al., 1995) found that an NGRI plea was most likely to be successful if one or more of the following factors were present:  • A diagnosed mental disorder, particularly a major mental  disorder  • A female defendant • The violent crime was other than murder • There had been prior mental hospitalizations  Three states—Idaho, Montana, and Utah—have entirely abolished the attribution of insanity as an acceptable defense for wrongdoing—a somewhat more harsh or severe solution that compensates in clarity for what some feel it lacks in compassion. As expected, with the disappearance of the insanity acquittals in Montana, there was a corresponding rise in the use of the “incompetent to stand trial” plea (see the following section), in which the charges were actually dismissed, largely negating the desired result (more effective prosecution) of doing away with the insanity defense (Callahan et al., 1995). How, then, is guilt or innocence determined? Many authori- ties believe that the insanity defense sets the courts an impossible task—determining guilt or innocence by reason of insanity on the basis of psychiatric testimony. In some cases, conflicting testimony has resulted because both the prosecution and the defense have their own panel of expert psychiatric witnesses, who are in complete disagreement (see discussion by Lareau, 2007). Finally, states have adopted the optional plea and verdict of  guilty but mentally ill (GBMI) . In these cases, a defendant may be sentenced but placed in a treatment facility rather than in a prison. This two-part judgment serves to prevent the type of sit- uation in which a person commits a murder, is found not guilty by reason of insanity, is turned over to a mental health facility, is found to be rational and in no further need of treatment by the hospital staff, and is unconditionally released to the community after only a minimal period of confinement. Under the two- part decision, such a person would remain in the custody of the correctional department until the full sentence has been served. Marvit (1981) has suggested that this approach might “realisti- cally balance the interest of the mentally ill offender’s rights and the community’s need to control criminal behavior” (p. 23).
However, others have argued that the GBMI defense is confus- ing to jurors and should be eliminated (Melville & Naimark, 2002). Interestingly, in Georgia, one of the states adopting this option, GBMI defendants receive longer sentences and longer periods of confinement than those who plead NGRI and lose. Overall, outcomes from the use of the GBMI standard, which is often employed in a plea-bargaining strategy, have been disap- pointing (Steadman et al., 1993).  competence to Stand trial  There is, in English common law, a principle that a person charged with a crime must be   competent to stand trial  (Stafford & Sadoff, 2011). If someone is charged with a crime and is considered to be unable to understand the trial proceed- ings as a result of intellectual deficit or mental health problems, they can be hospitalized until their mental state is judged to be improved sufficiently for them to be competent to stand trial. Several factors can influence a court decision that the defendant in the case is not competent to stand trial. Both cognitive abili- ties (such as capability in making decisions, having a working memory, being able to attend to proceedings, and being able to process events successfully) and psychiatric symptoms (psychoti- cism, withdrawal, depression, hostility) can be crucial factors in a person being able to stand trial. In May 2011, a federal court judge ruled that Jared Loughner was not competent to stand trial for shooting Con- gresswoman Gabrielle Giffords and killing six others (Harris, 2011). This court decision was based upon the opinion of expert witness psychiatrists from both the defense and prosecu- tion who examined Loughner. The defendant was held in a federal hospital for prisoners in Springfield, Illinois, until it was determined that he was able to stand trial. In August, 2012, after treatment for mental health problems, Loughner was judged to be mentally able to stand trial. He pleaded guilty to the criminal charges (Santos, 2012). In exchange for his guilty plea, the government agreed not to seek the death penalty. Research has underscored the role of cognitive deficits or mental health problems in determining a defendant’s compe- tence to stand trial. Ryba and Zapf (2011) recently reported that cognitive abilities accounted for higher scores for all three competence-related abilities than did the psychiatric symp- toms, although there was an additive effect when these groups of variables were considered collectively. In a recent evaluation of the published literature on competence to stand trial, Pirelli and colleagues (2011) concluded that defendants who had been diagnosed as having a psychotic disorder were approximately eight times more likely to be found incompetent than defendants without a psychotic disorder diagnosis. In addition, they found that defendants who had a previous psychiatric hospitalization, as compared with those never hospitalized, or had been unem- ployed, as compared to employed defendants, were more likely to be determined as incompetent to stand trial.  Does having Mental health Problems result in convicted felons Being returned to Prison after Being released?  Given that many individuals with severe mental health problems are sentenced to prison terms and receive no mental health treat- ment while in prison, are they able to adjust to society once they are released? Are psychologically disturbed people who receive prison terms more vulnerable to maladjustment when they are freed from prison? Questions have been raised about the impact of mental health problems on the ability of convicted prisoners to successfully return to society if they are paroled, serve out their terms, or are released because they are believed to no longer be a threat to themselves or others in the case of a successful NGRI decision. Cloyes and colleagues (2010) evaluated parole violation rates among inmates who had significant mental health problems versus those who did not and found that there was a significant difference in return rates and community tenure for offenders with significant mental illness compared to inmates without men- tal health problems. They found that 23 percent of their sample of inmates with significant mental health problems returned to prison sooner than those without mental health problems. Persons who have been charged with a crime but found not guilty by reason of insanity can be released from confinement if or when they are no longer judged to be of a danger to themselves or others. Although return to the community is not guaranteed for persons who are incarcerated after an NGRI plea, they can be released, and the state can determine explicit conditions for release, for example, follow-up mental health treatment, sub- stance abuse treatment, frequent monitoring, and so forth. Some research has suggested that with conditional treatment and careful  Jared Loughner, who killed six people and severely wounded congresswoman Gabriel Giffords in May 2011, was determined to be not competent to stand trial as a result of his mental disorder. In August, 2012, after treatment for mental health problems, Loughner was judged to be mentally able to stand trial. He pleaded guilty to the criminal charges. In exchange for his guilty plea, the government agreed not to seek the death penalty.
monitoring many people are able to return to society. However, the efficacy of treatment or careful monitoring has shown mixed results with many people being returned to confinement. Vitacco and colleagues (2008) found that 33.8 percent of inmates were returned to prison, with the majority of these being returned for failure to comply with treatment. When the amount of monitor- ing was taken into consideration they found that those who were placed on higher restrictions and received closer monitoring had lower rates of return to confinement. Hiday and Burns (2010), in their evaluation of the role of mental illness in the criminal justice system, concluded although the arrest rates and incarceration rates were higher for mentally ill persons than the general popula- tion, most people with mental illness are not violent and only a small percentage of the population become violent.  in review  •   What conditions must be met before an individual can be involuntarily committed to a mental institution? Describe the legal process that follows.  •   What are the implications of the Tarasoff decision for practicing clinicians?  •   What is the insanity (NGRI) defense in criminal cases?  •   What is the Federal Insanity Defense Reform Act? How does it differ from the M’Naghten rule?  Organized Efforts for Mental Health  Public awareness of the magnitude of contemporary mental health problems and the interest of government, professional, and lay organizations have stimulated the development of pro- grams directed at better understanding, more effective treatment, and long-range prevention. Efforts to improve mental health are apparent not only in our society but also in many other coun- tries, and they involve international as well as national and local organizations and approaches.  U.S. efforts for Mental health  In the United States in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, dealing with mental disorders was primarily the responsibility of state and local agencies. During World War II, however, the extent of mental disorders in the United States was brought to public attention when a large number of young men—two out of every seven recruits—were rejected for military service for psychiatric reasons. This discovery led to a variety of organized measures for taking care of people with mental illness.  the feDeral governMent anD Mental health   In 1946, aware of the need for more research, training, and services in the field of mental health, Congress passed its first compre- hensive mental health bill, the National Mental Health Act. In that same year, the NIMH was formed in Washington, DC. The agency was to serve as a central research and training center and as headquarters for the administration of a grant-in-aid program designed to foster research and training elsewhere in the nation and to help state and local communities expand and improve their own mental health services. Congress authorized the Institute to provide mental health project grants for experimental studies, pilot projects, surveys, and general research. Today the NIMH is a separate institute under the National Institutes of Health within the Department of Health and Human Services (NIMH, 2001). The NIMH (1) conducts and supports research on the biological, psychosocial, and sociocultural aspects of mental disorders; (2) supports the training of professional and para- professional personnel in the mental health field; (3) helps communities plan, establish, and maintain more effective men- tal health programs; and (4) provides information on mental health to the public and the scientific community. Two com- panion institutes—the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) and the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)—perform comparable functions in these more specialized fields. Although the federal government provides leadership and financial aid, the states and local organizations actually plan and run most NIMH programs. Most state and local governments, however, have not been able to fund programs and facilities because of cuts in federal support. As a result, many programs devoted to mental health training, research, and services have been greatly reduced or abandoned even as the need for them has increased. There is considerable uncertainty about the extent to which mental health problems will be included in forthcoming revisions of national health care policy and about the forms any such inclusion might take.  ProfeSSIonal organIzatIonS anD Mental health   A number of national professional organizations exist in the mental health field. These include the American Psychological Association (APA), the American Psychological Society (APS), the American Psychiatric Association (APA), the American Medical Association (AMA), the Association for the Advancement of Behavior Therapy (AABT), the American Association for Correctional and Forensic Psychology (AACFP), and the National Association for Social Work (NASW). A key function of professional organizations is the application of insights and methods to contemporary social problems—for example, in lobbying national and local govern- ment agencies to provide more services for underserved popula- tions. Professional mental health organizations are in a unique position to serve as consultants on mental health problems and programs. Another important function of these organizations is to set and maintain high professional and ethical standards within their specific areas. This function may include (1) establishing and reviewing training qualifications for professional and paraprofes- sional personnel; (2) setting standards and procedures for the accreditation of undergraduate and graduate training programs;
(3) setting standards for the accreditation of clinics, hospitals, or other service operations and carrying out inspections to see that the standards are followed; and (4) investigating reported cases of unethical or unprofessional conduct and taking disciplinary action when necessary.  the role of volUnteer organIzatIonS anD agencIeS   Although professional mental health personnel and organizations can give expert technical advice with regard to mental health needs and programs, informed citizens are essen- tial in planning and implementing these programs. In fact, it is primarily concerned nonprofessionals who have blazed the trails in the mental health field. Prominent among the many volunteer mental health agencies is the National Mental Health Association (NMHA). This orga- nization was founded in 1909 by Clifford Beers as the National Association for Mental Health and has subsequently expanded through various mergers. The NMHA works for the improvement of services in community clinics and mental hospitals; it helps recruit, train, and place volunteers for service in treatment and aftercare programs; and it works for enlightened mental health leg- islation and for the provision of needed facilities and personnel. It also offers special educational programs aimed at fostering positive mental health and helping people understand mental disorders. In addition, the National Mental Health Association has been actively involved in many court decisions affecting patient rights (1997). In several cases, the organization has sponsored litigation or served as   amicus curiae   (friend of the court) in efforts to estab- lish the rights of mental patients to treatment, to freedom from custodial confinement, to freedom to live in the community, and to protection of their confidentiality. The ARC, the largest national community-based organiza- tion advocating for people with intellectual and developmental disabilities, works to reduce the incidence of mental retarda- tion, to seek community and residential treatment centers and services for people with mental retardation, and to carry on a program of education aimed at better public understanding of mental retardation and greater support for legislation. The ARC also fosters scientific research into mental retardation, recruitment and training of volunteer workers, and programs of community action. These and other volunteer health organizations such as Alcoholics Anonymous and the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (NAMI) need the backing of a wide constituency of knowledgeable and involved citizens in order to succeed.  Mental health reSoUrceS In PrIvate InDUStry  Personal problems—such as marital distress or other family problems, alcohol or drug abuse, financial difficulties, and job- related stress—can adversely affect employee morale and perfor- mance. Sheid (2010) pointed out that employees’ disagreement with organizational priorities can also lead to employee burnout, emotional exhaustion, and depersonalization, which can contrib- ute to adjustment problems that require mental health services. Moreover, violence in the workplace has grown to be a common occurrence in our society (Kelloway et al., 2006) and often re- quires that employers take special steps to limit mental-health- related aggression. Psychological difficulties among employees may result in numerous problems such as absenteeism, accident proneness, poor productivity, and high job turnover. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) recognizes psychological disorders as one of the 10 leading work-related health problems, and work-related mental health risk factors may be increasing with changes in the economy, in technology, and in demographic factors in the workforce (Sauter et al., 1990). Research has shown, however, that persons with severe mental health problems can be integrated into the work- place if a supportive employment model is used to assist their involvement (Bond et al., 2007). Since the passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act, people with psychiatric problems cannot be discriminated against in the workplace. Employers are encouraged to alter the workplace as needed to accommodate the needs of persons with mental illness. Although employers often object that it is too costly to hire psychiatri- cally impaired persons, great benefits for society can result from integrating into productive jobs people who have disabilities but who also have appropriate skills (Kramer, 1998). A great deal more research is needed to identify specific mental health risk factors in work situations. We already know (e.g., Rosenstock et al., 2005) that serious, unrecog- nized problems may exist in the many areas of job design and conditions of work:  •   Workload and Pace.   The critical factor here appears to be the degree of control the worker has over the pace of work rather than output demand. Machine-paced assembly work may be particularly hazardous to mental health.  •   Work Schedule.   Rotating shifts and night work have been associated with elevated risk for psychological difficulties.  •   Role Stressors.   Role ambiguity (such as uncertainty about who has responsibility for what), said to be common in many work situations, has a negative impact on mental and physical health, as does role conflict (incompatible role demands).  •   Career Security Factors.   Feelings of insecurity related to issues such as job future or obsolescence, career develop- ment, and encouragement of early retirement adversely affect mental and physical health.  •   Interpersonal Relations.   Poor or unsupportive relationships among work colleagues significantly increase the risk of untoward psychological reactions.  •   Job Content.   Poor mental health has been associated with work assignments involving fragmented, narrow, unvarying
tasks that allow for little creativity and give the worker little sense of having contributed to the ultimate product. Many corporations have long recognized the importance of worker mental health and of enhancing mental health– promoting factors in the workplace, yet only recently have many of them acted on this knowledge. Today many companies have expanded their “obligations” to employees to include numerous psychological services. Employee assistance programs (EAPs) are means through which larger corporations can actively provide mental health services to employees and their family members (Finkel & Ryan, 2007; Harlow, 2007).  International efforts for Mental health  Mental health is a major issue not only in the United States but also in the rest of the world. Indeed, many of the problems in this country with regard to the treatment of mental disorders are greatly magnified in poorer countries and countries with repressive governments. The severity of the world mental health problem is reflected in the World Health Organization’s esti- mate that mental disorders affect more than 200 million people worldwide, partly because of the significant world refugee crisis (de Jong, 2002; Watters & Ingleby, 2004). Recognition of this great problem served to bring about the formation of several international organizations at the end of World War II. Here we will briefly discuss the World Health Organization (WHO) (2010) and the World Federation for Mental Health (WFMH).  the WorlD health organIzatIon   The World Health Organization (2001) has always been keenly aware of the close interrelationships among biological, psychosocial, and sociocul- tural factors. Examples include the influence of rapid change and social disruption on both physical and mental health; the impossibility of major progress toward mental health in societies where a large proportion of the population suffers from malnu- trition, parasites, and disease; and the frequent psychological and cultural barriers to successful programs in family planning and public health (Rutz, 2001). Formed after World War II as part of the United Nations system, WHO’s earliest focus was on physical diseases; it has helped make dramatic progress toward the conquest of such ancient scourges as smallpox and malaria. Over the years, men- tal health, too, has become an increasing concern among the member countries. WHO’s goals are to integrate mental health resources to deal with the broad problems of overall health and socioeconomic development that many member countries face (World Health Organization, 2010). Another important contribution of WHO has been its International Classification of Diseases (ICD), which enables clinicians and researchers in different countries to use a uniform set of diagnostic categories. As discussed in Chapter 4, the American Psychiatric Association’s diag- nostic classification system has been coordinated with the WHO’s ICD-10 classification (Sartorius et al., 1993). Currently ICD-10 is undergoing revision and is slated for publication in 2015.  the WorlD feDeratIon for Mental health   The World Federation for Mental Health was established in 1948 as an international congress of nongovernmental organizations and individuals concerned with mental health. Its purpose is to promote international cooperation among governmental and nongovernmental mental health agencies, and its membership now extends to more than 50 countries (Brody, 2004). The federation has been granted consultative status by WHO, and it assists the UN agencies by collecting information on mental health conditions all over the world (World Health Organization, 2007). The last century witnessed an amazing openness and a low- ering of previously impassable barriers between nations. Along with this increased interchange of ideas and cooperation, we expect to see a broader mental health collaboration. It is vital that greater international cooperation in the sciences and in health planning continue, along with more sharing of informa- tion and views on mental health.  in review  •   What is the role of the National Institute of Mental Health in providing care for the mentally ill?  •   What is the NMHA, and how does it contribute to improvement in mental health services?  •   What have been the major contributions of WHO in improving services in mental health?  Challenges for the Future  Even though international cooperation in efforts to understand and enhance mental health is encouraging, the media confront us daily with the stark truth that we have a long way to go before our dreams of a better world are realized. Many people question whether the United States or any other technologically advanced nation can achieve improvements in mental health for the majority of its citizens in our time. Racism, poverty, youth violence, terrorism, the uprooting of developing world popu- lations, and other social problems that contribute to mental disorder sometimes seem insurmountable. Other events in the rest of the world affect us also, both directly and indirectly. Worldwide economic instability and shortages and the possibility of the destruction of our planet’s life ecology breed widespread anxiety about the future. The vast resources we have spent on military programs over the past half century to protect against perceived threats have absorbed funds and energy that otherwise might have been devoted to meet- ing human and social needs here and elsewhere in the world. The limited resources we are now willing to allocate to mental
health problems prevent our solving major problems resulting from drug and alcohol abuse, homelessness, broken families, and squalid living conditions.  the need for Planning  The Institute of Medicine (2006) recently reported that sweep- ing quality improvements are needed in the U.S. mental health care system. The report noted that only 20 percent of people with substance abuse or dependency and only 40 percent of people with serious mental illness actually receive treatment for their problems. If mental health problems are going to be reduced or eliminated, it is imperative that more effective planning be done at community, national, and international levels. Many challenges must be met if we are to create a better world for ourselves and future generations. Without slacken- ing our efforts to meet needs at home, we will probably find it essential to participate more broadly in international mea- sures aimed at reducing group tensions and promoting mental health and a better world for people everywhere. At the same time, we can expect that the measures we undertake to reduce international conflict and improve the general condition of humankind will make a significant contribution to our own nation’s social progress and mental health. Both kinds of mea- sures will require understanding and moral commitment from concerned citizens. Within our own country and the rest of the industrialized world, progress in prolonging life has brought with it burgeoning problems in the prevalence of disorders associated with advanced age, particularly in the area of conditions such as Alzheimer’s dis- ease. Judging by the numbers of people already affected, it is not certain at this time that we will find the means of eradicating or arresting this threat before it has overwhelmed us. Planning and preparation would seem our only rational hope of forestalling a potential disaster of unprecedented magnitude; we need to make a beginning.  the Individual’s contribution  History provides clear examples of individuals whose efforts were instrumental in changing the way we think about mental health problems. Recall that Pinel took off the chains, Dorothea Dix initiated a movement to improve the conditions of asylums, and Clifford Beers inspired the modern mental health move- ment with his autobiographical account of his own experience with mental illness. Who will lead the next revolution in mental health is anyone’s guess. What is clear is that a great deal can be accomplished by individual effort. When students become aware of the tremendous scope of the mental health problem both nationally and internationally and of the woefully inadequate facilities for coping with it, they often ask, “What can I do?” Thus it seems appropriate to suggest a few of the lines of action that interested students can take. Many opportunities in mental health work are open to trained personnel, both professional and paraprofessional. Social work, clinical psychology, psychiatry, and other mental health occupations are personally fulfilling. In addition, many occupations, ranging from law enforcement to teaching and the ministry, can and do play key roles in the mental health and well-being of many people. Training in all these fields usually offers individuals opportunities to work in community clinics and related facilities, to gain experience in understanding the needs and problems of people in distress, and to become familiar with community resources. Citizens can find many ways to be of direct service if they are familiar with national and international resources and programs and if they invest the effort necessary to learn about their community’s special needs and problems. What- ever their roles in life—student, teacher, police officer, law- yer, homemaker, business executive, or trade unionist—their interests are directly at stake, for although the mental health of a nation may be manifested in many ways—in its purposes, courage, moral responsibility, scientific and cultural achieve- ments, and quality of daily life—its health and resources derive ultimately from the individuals within it. In a partici- patory democracy, it is they who plan and implement the nation’s goals. Besides accepting some measure of responsibility for the mental health of others through the quality of one’s own interpersonal relationships, there are several other constructive courses of action open to each citizen. These include (1) serving as a volunteer in a mental hospital, community mental health center, or service organization; (2) supporting realistic measures for ensuring comprehensive health services for all age groups; and (3) working toward improved public education, responsible government, the alleviation of prejudice, and the establishment of a more sane and harmonious world. All of us are concerned with mental health for personal as well as altruistic reasons, for we want to overcome the nag- ging problems of contemporary living and find our share of happiness in a meaningful and fulfilling life. To do so, we may sometimes need the courage to admit that our problems are too much for us. When existence seems futile or the going becomes too difficult, it may help to remind ourselves of the following basic facts, which have been emphasized throughout this text: From time to time, each of us has serious difficulties in cop- ing with the problems of living. During such crises, we may need psychological and related assistance. Such difficulties are not a disgrace; they can happen to anyone if the stress is severe enough. The early detection and treatment of maladaptive behavior are of great importance in preventing the development of more severe or chronic conditions. Preventive measures— universal, selected, and indicated—are the most effective long- range approach to the solution of both individual and group mental health problems.
in review  •   What are national and international programs aimed at providing solutions to mental health problems?  •   Describe several ways in which individuals can contribute to the advancement of mental health.  •   After reading the Unresolved Issues feature, discuss the contro- versy over the effects of managed health care on the treatment and prevention of mental illness.  UnrESOLvEd issues  The HMOs and Mental Health Care  A health maintenance organization (HMO)   is a business or management corporation that provides a form of health care coverage in the United States that is fulfilled through contracts with hospitals, doctors, and other health providers. Unlike traditional health insurance, the health care is made available through agreements with health professionals to treat more patients and in return usually to provide services at a discount. This business arrangement al- lows the HMO to charge a lower monthly premium, which is an advantage over indemnity insurance, provided that its members are willing to abide by the additional restrictions (Frank et al., 2004). The HMO serves as a “gatekeeper” be- tween the patient and the health provider. This arrangement has clearly affected access to mental health care in the United States in that business decisions often take precedence over treatment need. Treatment, when it is allowed by the HMO, tends to be limited in both duration and quality. The disillu- sionment with HMOs in the 1990s led to the development of alternative health funding or   managed health care   products. Several programs emerged that were less restrictive, giving patients more options in treatment choices. However, this has done little to reduce the anger toward managed care, and there is still a need for an alternative approach to providing more effective health care (Kominski & Melnick, 2007). Mental health treatment is valuable for preventing as well as easing mental disorders. Yet mental health treatment has been less readily available than physical health treatment, and its cost has been less often reimbursed. HMO programs establish a treatment staff through systems of professionals, referred to as “panels,” who are considered to have efficacy and efficiency in providing a wide range of services. Some HMOs—referred to as “open-panel systems”—have allowed patients some choice of health providers and allow any qualified professional in the community to participate. However, most are closed-panel systems, which limit the selection of available providers. The benefits vary from plan to plan and usually include limits on the problems covered or on the maximum amount of care provided or services available. To keep costs low, some HMOs have oper- ated according to a system of “capitation,” a method of pay- ment in which a health care provider contracts to deliver all the health care services required by a population for a fixed cost or flat fee per enrolled member or employee (Sanchez & Turner, 2003). The HMO thus assumes some risk, but capitation allows for great profit if the subscriber’s fees can be set higher than the cost of health services. The need for comprehensive and effective mental health treat- ment is great. About one in four adults, or about 26.2 percent of Americans ages 18 and older, suffer from a diagnosable mental disorder in a given year (Kessler, Chiu et al., 2005). It has also been estimated that 70 percent of adults and 80 percent of children who require mental health services do not receive treatment, primarily because of discriminatory insur- ance practices (Sussman, 2009). Many people with mental health problems seek medical treatment for their psychological symptoms, thereby increasing the cost of medical care. In one study, Hunkeler and colleagues (2003) point out a strong as- sociation between psychiatric symptoms, impaired functioning, and general medical care costs. About 75 percent of patients with depression seek treatment for physical symptoms (Unutzer et al., 2006). Moreover, patients with other psychiatric condi- tions such as PTSD also present with physical symptoms (see Chapter 5). Health care costs in general are reportedly rising, and the presence of any psychiatric diagnosis increases the health care cost. In response to these mental health needs, health care adminis- trators have created a diverse array of programs in an attempt to provide services at a cost that the system can afford.  Mental health treatment—Who Decides What Kind and how long?   In one common approach to reducing health care costs, the managed care agency negotiates a reduced price directly with the health service provider. The provider then bills the health service organization for the time spent, and the HMO can obtain “low-bid” services from the health professional. This approach poses little financial risk to the provider. As might be apparent even to the casual observer of managed care systems, the procedures for determining the amount of money paid to providers have frequently been a problem for mental health professionals—psychologists and psychiatrists (Resnick et al., 1994). The HMO representative or “gatekeeper” to reimburse- ment, often a medical generalist untrained in either psychiatric disorders or psychosocial interventions, controls access to
therapy and sometimes the type of treatment to be provided (Resnick et al., 1994). In some systems of managed care, the gatekeeper might be a business professional who, in the view of the health service provider, is determining treatment by re- quiring that the clinician periodically justify treatment decisions to someone who has little or no background in mental health. Conflicts can develop in such situations, and patients may be deprived of appropriate and necessary care (Resnick et al., 1994). HMOs that are overly cost conscious have come to be viewed by some practitioners as simply tending to business and neglecting patients’ needs (Karon, 1995).  tIMe-lIMIteD theraPy  The mental health services typically covered by HMOs have favored less expensive and less labor-intensive approaches. As might be expected, pharmacotherapy is the most frequent mental health treatment provided by HMOs (Frank et al., 2005)—a situation that some research suggests actually re- duces health care costs. Other research has shown that cost- containment measures that are intended to reduce drug costs by restricting access to medications can—and often do—wind up increasing total health care costs (Horn, 2003). Further, psychosocial interventions such as individual psychotherapy are discouraged or limited to relatively few sessions. Long- term psychotherapy has been substantially reduced for all but a small number of wealthy private clients (Lazarus, 1996). On the other hand, group psychotherapy is often promoted and encouraged because it is often thought of as cost effective. Many managed care corporations have adopted the model of providing focused, brief, intermittent mental health treatment for most problems. Many forms of behavioral health services such as counseling programs to teach patients how to manage their illness, how to use relaxation response methods, or how to reduce unhealthy behaviors such as smoking or drinking have been implemented to improve health care while reducing costs (Blount et al., 2007). Patients who require longer treatments or need inpatient hospitalization are typically not well served in managed care organizations. In fact, long-term mental health treatment is usu- ally discouraged by managed health care organizations. For ex- ample, most managed care groups approve only short inpatient stays (less than 10 days) and four to six sessions of outpatient mental health treatment at a time. Few if any of the decisions regarding the amount and type of services provided are directly guided by empirical criteria. Decisions whether to cover 8 or 20 sessions of psychotherapy, for example, are arbi- trary and often seem capricious to both practitioner and patient (Harwood et al., 1997). A clear divide has developed between health service provid- ers and managers. Available services are often governed more by financial concerns than by a mental health professional’s judgment. Critics of managed care argue that there is no convincing evidence that current efforts are actually control- ling costs (Harwood et al., 1997) and that there is no scientific support for the limited-benefit options being exercised. Some researchers have pointed out that the administrative costs for managed care centers (including high salaries for HMO execu- tives) are exorbitant. Gabbard (1994), for example, estimated that about one-fourth of the health care expenditures in the United States go for managed care administration. The general lack of mental health care support has clearly created controversy in the field of psychotherapy, and the mental health field is being altered by economic consider- ations. Sanchez and Turner (2003) provide an overview of the impact of managed care on psychological practice and the provision of mental health services to clients in need. They point out that the economics of the mental health care sys- tem have greatly impacted the practice of behavioral health care by limiting treatment to time-limited and symptom- focused services. The most frequently cited problems include the remarkable shift of treatment decision-making power from the behavioral health care provider to policymakers. In addition, practitioners have experienced a reduction in income, which has likely impacted quality of care because less-well-trained (non-doctoral-level) therapists have taken on more responsibility and offer short-term therapeutic ap- proaches instead of needed long-term therapy. The nature of the mental health professions is changing, and there is a growing discontent with health maintenance organizations in society today (Mechanic, 2004). Both clients and mental health professionals have long experienced a breakdown in trust of the managed care system (Shore, 2007). Although discrimination against mental health care compared with medical or surgical treatment has long affected the provi- sion of mental health treatment in the United States, recent attempts to provide parity for mental health care might bring about some much needed changes. A new law, referred to as the Mental Health Parity Act (MHPA) of 2008, or the Paul Wellstone, Pete Domenici Parity Act Prohibits Discrimination, requires that the annual or lifetime dollar caps on mental health benefits be no lower than the dollar limits for medical and sur- gical benefits (Sussman, 2009). The parity act prohibits group health insurance plans, typically provided by employers, from restricting access to care by limiting benefits and requiring higher patient costs than those that apply to general medical or surgical benefits. It is difficult at this point to venture as to what impact the new health care plan and the parity bill will have on improving the quality and availability of mental health care in the United States. Any solutions to the long-standing problems are likely to be complex and require substantial change to the present system.
17.1   What is the importance of prevention in mental health care?  •   Many mental health professionals are trying not only to cure mental health problems but also to prevent them, or at least to reduce their effects.  •   Prevention can be viewed as focusing on three levels: (1) uni- versal interventions, which attempt to reduce the long-term consequences of having had a disorder; (2) selective interven- tions, which are aimed at reducing the possibility of disorder and fostering positive mental health efforts in subpopulations that are considered at special risk; and (3) indicated interventions, which attempt to reduce the impact or duration of a problem that has already occurred.  17.2   What is the status and contemporary issues of inpatient mental health treatment?  •   With the advent of many new psychotropic medications and changing treatment philosophies, there has been a major effort to discharge psychiatric patients into the community  •   There has been a great deal of controversy over deinstitutionaliza- tion and the failure to provide prompt and adequate follow-up of these patients in the community as soon as possible.  17.3   What are the controversial legal issues involving the mentally ill?  •   Being mentally ill is not considered sufficient grounds for invol- untary commitment. There must be, in addition, evidence that the individual either is dangerous to herself or himself or repre- sents a danger to society.  •   It is not an easy matter, even for trained professionals, to deter- mine in advance whether a person is dangerous and likely to harm others. Nevertheless, professionals must sometimes make such judgments.  •   Recent court rulings have found professionals liable when patients they were treating caused harm to others. The Tarasoff decision held that a therapist has a duty to protect potential vic- tims if her or his patient has threatened to kill them.  •   The insanity plea for capital crimes is an important issue in forensic psychology. Many mental health and legal professionals, journalists, and laypersons have questioned the present use of the not guilty by reason of insanity (NGRI) defense.  •   The original legal precedent, the M’Naghten rule, held that at the time of committing the act the accused must have been laboring under such a defect of reason as not to know the nature and quality of the act or not to know that what he or she was doing was wrong.  •   More recent broadenings of the insanity plea, as in the American Law Institute standard, leave open the possibility of valid NGRI pleas by persons who are not diagnosed to be psychotic.  •   The successful use of the NGRI defense by John Hinckley, attempted assassin of President Reagan, set off a storm of protest. One effective and widely adopted reform was to shift the burden of proof (of insanity) to the defense.  17.4   What national and international organizations promote efforts for mental health?  •   Federal agencies such as the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), and the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) are devoted to promoting research, training, and ser- vices to the mental health community.  •   Several professional and mental health organizations, many cor- porations, and a number of volunteer associations are also active in programs to promote mental health.  •   International organizations such as the World Health Organization (WHO) and the World Federation for Mental Health (WFMH) have contributed to mental health programs worldwide.  17.5   What are the challenges for the future of abnormal psychology?  •   More effective planning needs to take place at community, national, and international levels in order to reduce or eliminate mental health problems.  •   Many opportunities in mental health work, including social work, clinical psychology, and psychiatry, are open to trained personnel.  •   Citizens can become involved in helping the mentally ill in their communities through volunteer work, supporting measures for ensuring comprehensive health services for all, and working toward improved public education, responsible government, and the alleviation of prejudice.  17   summary key terms  civil commitment   591  competent to stand trial   600  deinstitutionalization   589  forensic psychology (forensic psychiatry)   591  guilty but mentally ill (gBMI)   599  health maintenance organization (hMo)   605  indicated interventions   584  insanity defense   596  managed health care   605  milieu therapy   588  ngrI plea   596  residential treatment   588  selective interventions   584  social-learning programs   589  tarasoff decision   595  universal interventions   584
GLOSSARY   609  Androgen.   Hormone associated with the development and maintenance of male characteristics.  Anesthesia.   Loss or impairment of sensitivity (usually to touch but often applied to sensitiv- ity to pain and other senses as well).  Anhedonia.   Inability to experience pleasure or joy.  Anorexia nervosa.   Intense fear of gaining weight or becoming “fat” coupled with refusal to maintain adequate nutrition and with severe loss of body weight.  Anoxia.   Lack of sufficient oxygen.  Antabuse.   Drug used in the treatment of alcoholism.  Anterograde amnesia.   Loss of memory for events that occur   following   trauma or shock.  Antianxiety drugs.   Drugs that are used primar- ily for alleviating anxiety.  Antibody.   Circulating blood substance coded for detection of and binding to a particular antigen.  Antidepressant drugs.   Drugs that are used pri- marily to elevate mood and relieve depression. Often also used in the treatment of certain anxiety disorders, bulimia, and certain person- ality disorders.  Antigen.   A foreign body (e.g., a virus or bacte- ria) or an internal threat (e.g., a tumor) that can trigger an immune response.  Antipsychotics (neuroleptics).   Medications that alleviate or diminish the intensity of psychotic symptoms such as hallucinations or delusions.  Antisocial personality disorder (ASPD).   Disorder characterized by continual violation of and disregard for the rights of oth- ers through deceitful, aggressive, or antisocial behavior, typically without remorse or loyalty to anyone.  Anxiety.   A general feeling of apprehension about possible danger.  Anxiety disorder.   An unrealistic, irrational fear or anxiety of disabling intensity.   DSM-IV-TR  recognizes seven types of anxiety disorders: phobic disorders (specific or social), panic disorder (with or without agoraphobia), gen- eralized anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder.  Anxiety sensitivity.   A personality trait involving a high level of belief that certain bodily symp- toms may have harmful consequences.  Aphasia.   Loss or impairment of ability to communicate and understand language sym- bols—involving loss of power of expression by speech, writing, or signs, or loss of ability to comprehend written or spoken language— resulting from brain injury or disease.  APOE-4 allele.   Variant of a gene on chromo- some 19 that significantly enhances risk for late-onset Alzheimer’s disease.  Apraxia.   Loss of ability to perform purposeful movements.  Arousal.   See   Activation .  Arteriosclerosis.   Degenerative thickening and hardening of the walls of the arteries, occur- ring usually in old age.  Asperger’s disorder.   Severe and sustained childhood impairment in social relationships and peculiar behaviors but without the lan- guage delays seen in autism.  Assertive community treatment (ACT).   Persistent and vigorous follow-up with and aid to patients in managing life problems.  Assertiveness therapy.   Behavior therapy tech- nique for helping people become more self- assertive in interpersonal relationships.  Assimilation.   Cognitive process whereby new experiences tend to be worked into existing cognitive frameworks even if the new informa- tion has to be reinterpreted or distorted to make it fit.  Association studies.   Genetic research strategy comparing frequency of certain genetic mark- ers known to be located on particular chromo- somes in people with and without a particular disorder.  Asylums.   Historically, these were institutions meant solely for the care of the mentally ill.  At risk.   Condition of being considered vulner- able to the development of certain abnormal behaviors.  Atrophy.   Wasting away or shrinking of a bodily organ, particularly muscle tissue.  Attachment theory.   Contemporary develop- mental and psychodynamic theory emphasiz- ing the importance of early experience with attachment relationships in laying the founda- tion for later functioning throughout life.  Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).   Disorder of childhood characterized by difficulties that interfere with task-oriented behavior, such as impulsivity, excessive motor activity, and difficulties in sustaining attention.  Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome.   Characterized by psychotic-like symptoms that are less severe and more transient and that lie below the threshold for a full psychotic disorder.  Attribution.   Process of assigning causes to things that happen.  Autism.   Pervasive developmental disorder beginning in infancy and involving a wide range of problematic behaviors, including deficits in language, perception, and motor development; defective reality testing; and social withdrawal.  Autogynephilia.   Paraphilia characterized by sexual arousal in men at the thought or fantasy of being a woman.  Autonomic nervous system.   Section of the nervous system that regulates the internal organs; consists primarily of ganglia connected with the brain stem and spinal cord; may be subdivided into the sympathetic and parasym- pathetic systems.  Autonomic reactivity.   Individual’s characteristic degree of emotional reactivity to stress.  Autonomy.   Self-reliance; the sense of being an independent person.  Autosome.   Any chromosome other than those determining sex.  Aversion therapy.   Form of behavior therapy in which punishment or aversive stimulation is used to eliminate undesired responses.  Aversive stimulus.   Stimulus that elicits psychic or physical pain.  Avoidance learning.   Form of conditioning in which a subject learns to behave in a certain way in order to avoid an unpleasant stimulus.  Avoidant personality disorder.   Extreme social inhibition and introversion, hypersensitivity to criticism and rejection, limited social relation- ships, and low self-esteem.  Avolition.   Refers to a psychological state that is characterized by a general lack of drive or motivation to pursue meaningful goals.  Axes (of DSM).   Evaluation of an individual according to five foci, the first three assessing the person’s present clinical status or condition and the other two assessing broader aspects of the person’s situation.  B  Barbiturates.   Synthetic drugs that act as depres- sants to calm the individual and induce sleep.  Baseline.   The initial level of responses emitted by an organism.  B-cell.   A type of white blood cell, produced in the bone marrow, that is (along with T-cells) very important in the immune system. B-cells produce specific antibodies in response to spe- cific antigens.  Behavior genetics.   Field that studies the herita- bility of mental disorders and other aspects of psychological functioning such as personality and intelligence.  Behavior modification.   Change of specific behaviors by learning techniques.  Behavior therapy.   Use of therapeutic proce- dures based primarily on principles of classical and operant conditioning.  Behavioral activation treatment.   Treatment for depression in which the patient and the therapist work together to help the patient find ways to become more active and engaged with life.  Behavioral contracting.   Positive reinforcement technique using a contract, often between family members, to identify the behaviors to be changed and to specify privileges and responsibilities.  Behavioral medicine.   Broad interdisciplinary approach to the treatment of physical disorders thought to have psychological factors as major aspects in their causation or maintenance.
610   GLOSSARY  Behavioral perspective.   A theoretical viewpoint organized around the theme that learning is central in determining human behavior.  Behavioral sciences.   Various interrelated disci- plines, including psychology, sociology, and anthropology, that focus on human behavior.  Behaviorism.   School of psychology that for- merly restricted itself primarily to the study of overt behavior.  Benign.   Of a mild, self-limiting nature; not malignant.  Bias.   Observer bias occurs when the researcher has preconceived ideas and expectations that influence the observations he or she makes in the research study.  Binge.   An out-of-control consumption of an amount of food that is far greater than what most people would eat in the same amount of time and under the same circumstances.  Binge-eating disorder (BED).   Distinct from nonpurging bulimia nervosa, whereby binging is not accompanied by inappropriate compen- satory behavior to limit weight gain.  Biofeedback.   Treatment technique in which a person is taught to influence his or her own physiological processes that were formerly thought to be involuntary.  Biogenic amines.   Chemicals that serve as neu- rotransmitters or modulators.  Biological clocks.   Regular biological cycles of sleep, activity, hormone activity, and metabo- lism characteristic of each species.  Biological viewpoint.   Approach to mental disor- ders emphasizing biological causation.  Biopsychosocial viewpoint.   A viewpoint that acknowledges the interacting roles of biologi- cal, psychosocial, and sociocultural factors in the origins of psychopathology.  Bipolar disorder with a seasonal pat- tern.   Bipolar disorder with recurrences in particular seasons of the year.  Bipolar disorders.   Mood disorders in which a person experiences both manic and depressive episodes.  Bipolar I disorder.   A form of bipolar disorder in which the person experiences both manic (or mixed) episodes and major depressive episodes.  Bipolar II disorder.   A form of bipolar disorder in which the person experiences both hypo- manic episodes and major depressive episodes.  Bisexuality.   Sexual attraction to both females and males.  Blocking.   Involuntary inhibition of recall, ide- ation, or communication (including sudden stoppage of speech).  Blood-injection-injury phobia.   Persistent and disproportionate fear of the sight of blood or injury, or the possibility of having an injec- tion. Afflicted persons are likely to experience a drop in blood pressure and sometimes faint.  Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD).   Obsession with some perceived flaw or flaws in one’s appearance.  Body mass index (BMI).   An estimation of total body fat calculated as body weight in kilo- grams divided by height (in meters) squared.  Borderline personality disorder (BPD).   Impulsivity and instability in interper- sonal relationships, self-image, and moods.  Brain pathology.   Diseased or disordered condi- tion of the brain.  Brain waves.   Minute oscillations of electrical potential given off by neurons in the cerebral cortex and measured by the electroencephalo- graph (EEG).  Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS).   Objective method of rating clinical symptoms that pro- vides scores on 18 variables (e.g., somatic con- cern, anxiety, withdrawal, hostility, and bizarre thinking).  Brief psychotherapy.   Short-term therapy, usu- ally 8 to 10 sessions, focused on restoring an individual’s functioning and offering emo- tional support.  Brief psychotic disorder.   Brief episodes (lasting a month or less) of otherwise uncomplicated delusional thinking.  Bulimia nervosa.   Frequent occurrence of binge- eating episodes accompanied by a sense of loss of control of overeating and recurrent inap- propriate behavior such as purging or excessive exercise to prevent weight gain.  C  Caffeine.   A drug of dependence found in many commonly available drinks and foods.  Candidate genes.   Genes that are of specific interest to researchers because they are thought to be involved in processes that are known to be aberrant in that disorder (e.g., serotonin transporter genes in depression, or dopamine receptor genes in schizophrenia).  Cardiovascular.   Pertaining to the heart and blood vessels.  Case study method.   An in-depth examination of an individual or family that draws from a number of data sources, including interviews and psychological testing.  Castrating.   Refers to any source of injury to the genitals, or, more broadly, to a threat to the masculinity of an individual.  Castration anxiety.   As postulated by Freud, the anxiety a young boy experiences when he desires his mother while at the same time fear- ing that his father may harm him by cutting of his penis; this anxiety forces the boy to repress his sexual desire for his mother and his hostil- ity toward his father.  CAT scan.   See   Computerized axial tomog- raphy (CAT) scan .  Catalepsy.   Condition seen in some schizo- phrenic psychoses, and some psychotic mood disorders, in which body postures are waxy and semirigid, with the limbs maintaining for prolonged periods any position in which they are placed.  Catatonic schizophrenia.   See   Schizophrenia, catatonic type .  Catecholamines.   Class of monoamine com- pounds sharing a similar chemical structure. Known to be neurotransmitters—norepineph- rine and dopamine.  Categorical approach.   Approach to classifying abnormal behavior that assumes that (1) all human behavior can be sharply divided into the categories normal and abnormal, and (2) there exist discrete, nonoverlapping classes or types of abnormal behavior, often referred to as mental illnesses or diseases.  Catharsis.   Discharge of emotional tension associated with something, such as by talking about past traumas.  Causal pattern.   In a cause-and-effect relation- ship, a situation in which more than one causal factor is involved.  Causation.   Relationship in which the preceding variable causes the other(s).  Central nervous system (CNS).   The brain and spinal cord.  Cerebral arteriosclerosis.   Hardening of the arteries in the brain.  Cerebral cortex.   Surface layers of the cerebrum.  Cerebral hemorrhage.   Bleeding into brain tis- sue from a ruptured blood vessel.  Cerebral laceration.   Tearing of brain tissue associated with severe head injury.  Cerebral syphilis.   Syphilitic infection of the brain.  Cerebral thrombosis.   Formation of a clot or thrombus in the vascular system of the brain.  Cerebrovascular accident (CVA).   Blockage or rupture of a large blood vessel in the brain leading to both focal and generalized impair- ment of brain function. Also called   stroke.  Cerebrum.   Main part of the brain; divided into left and right hemispheres.  Child abuse.   Infliction of physical or psycho- logical damage on a child by parents or other adults.  Child advocacy.   Movement concerned with protecting rights and ensuring well-being of children.  Chorea.   Pathological condition characterized by jerky, irregular, involuntary movements. See also   Huntington’s disease .  Chromosomal anomalies.   Inherited defects or vulnerabilities caused by irregularities in chromosomes.  Chromosomes.   Chain-like structures within cell nucleus that contain genes.  Chronic.   Term used to describe a long-standing or frequently recurring disorder, often with progressing seriousness.
GLOSSARY   611  Chronic fatigue syndrome.   A debilitating ill- ness characterized by disabling fatigue that lasts 6 months or more and occurs with other symptoms.  Chronic major depressive disorder.   A disorder in which a major depressive episode does not remit over a 2-year period.  Chronic schizophrenic.   A schizophrenic patient whose condition has deteriorated or remained stable over a long period of time (years).  Circadian rhythms.   The 24-hour rhythmic fluc- tuations in animals’ sleep activity and in the metabolic processes of plants and animals. See also   Biological clocks .  Civil commitment.   Procedure whereby a person certified as mentally disordered can be hospi- talized, either voluntarily or against his or her will.  Classical conditioning.   A basic form of learning in which a neutral stimulus is paired repeat- edly with an unconditioned stimulus (US) that naturally elicits an unconditioned response (UR). After repeated pairings, the neutral stimulus becomes a conditioned stimulus (CS) that elicits a conditioned response (CR).  Claustrophobia.   Irrational fear of small enclosed places.  Client-centered (person-centered) ther- apy.   Nondirective approach to psycho- therapy, developed chiefly by Carl Rogers, that focuses on the natural power of the organism to heal itself; a key goal is to help clients accept and be themselves.  Clinical diagnosis.   The process through which a clinician arrives at a general “summary classifi- cation” of the patient’s symptoms by following a clearly defined system such as   DSM-IV-TR  or ICD-10.  Clinical picture.   Diagnostic picture formed by observation of patient’s behavior or by all available assessment data.  Clinical problem checklist.   Computer- administered psychological assessment proce- dure for surveying the range of psychological problems a patient is experiencing.  Clinical psychologist.   Mental health professional with Ph.D. degree or Psy.D. degree in clinical psychology and clinical experience in assess- ment and psychotherapy.  Clinical psychology.   Field of psychology con- cerned with the understanding, assessment, treatment, and prevention of maladaptive behavior.  Cocaine.   Stimulating and pain-reducing psy- choactive drug.  Cognition.   Act, process, or product of knowing or perceiving.  Cognitive dissonance.   Condition of tension existing when several of one’s beliefs and atti- tudes are inconsistent with each other.  Cognitive processes (cognition).   Mental pro- cesses, including perception, memory, and reasoning, by which one acquires knowledge, solves problems, and makes plans.  Cognitive remediation.   Training efforts designed to help patients improve their neu- rocognitive (e.g., memory, vigilance) skills. The hope is that this will also help improve patients’ overall levels of functioning.  Cognitive restructuring.   Cognitive-behavioral therapy techniques that aim to change a person’s negative or unrealistic thoughts and attributions.  Cognitive-behavioral perspective.   A theory of abnormal behavior that focuses on how thoughts and information processing can become distorted and lead to maladaptive emotions and behavior.  Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT).   Therapy based on altering dysfunctional thoughts and cognitive distortions.  Collective unconscious.   Term used by Carl Jung to refer to that portion of the uncon- scious that he considered common to all humanity, based on wisdom acquired by our predecessors.  Coma.   Profound stupor with unconsciousness.  Community mental health.   Application of psy- chosocial and sociocultural principles to the improvement of given environments.  Community psychology.   Use of community resources in dealing with maladaptive behav- ior; tends to be more concerned with com- munity intervention than with personal or individual change.  Comorbidity.   Occurrence of two or more iden- tified disorders in the same psychologically disordered individual.  Comparison or control group.   Group of sub- jects who do not exhibit the disorder being studied but who are comparable in all other respects to the criterion group. Also, a com- parison group of subjects who do not receive a condition or treatment the effects of which are being studied.  Competent to stand trial.   The determination that a person who is charged with a crime has the mental health capability to participate in the proceedings.  Compulsions.   Overt repetitive behaviors (such as hand washing or checking) or more covert mental acts (such as counting, praying, say- ing certain words silently, or ordering) that a person feels driven to perform in response to an obsession.  Compulsive gambling.   See   Pathological gambling .  Computer assessment.   Use of computers to obtain or interpret assessment data.  Computerized axial tomography (CAT) scan.  Radiological technique used to locate and assess the extent of organic damage to the brain without surgery.  Concordance rate.   The percentage of twins sharing a disorder or trait.  Conduct disorders.   Childhood and adolescent disorders that can appear by age 9 and are marked by persistent acts of aggressive or anti- social behavior that may or may not be against the law.  Confabulation.   Filling in of memory gaps with false and often irrelevant details.  Confidentiality.   Commitment on part of a pro- fessional person to keep information he or she obtains from a client confidential.  Conflict.   Simultaneous arousal of opposing impulses, desires, or motives.  Congenital.   Existing at birth or before birth, but not necessarily hereditary.  Congenital defect.   Genetic defect or environ- mental condition occurring before birth and causing a child to develop a physical or psy- chological anomaly.  Conjoint family therapy.   Direct involvement of the family in improving communication, interaction, and relationships among family members and fostering a family system that better meets the needs of each member.  Consciousness.   Awareness of inner or outer environment.  Constitution.   Relatively constant biological makeup of an individual, resulting from the interaction of heredity and environment.  Consultation.   Community intervention approach that aims at helping individuals at risk for disorder by working indirectly through caretaker institutions (e.g., police and teachers).  Contingency.   Relationship, usually causal, between two events in which one is usually followed by the other.  Continuous reinforcement.   Reward or rein- forcement given regularly after each correct response.  Contributory cause.   A condition that increases the probability of developing a disorder but that is neither necessary nor sufficient for it to occur.  Conversion disorder.   Pattern in which symp- toms of some physical malfunction or loss of control appear without any underlying organic pathology; originally called   hysteria.  Convulsion.   Pathological, involuntary muscle contractions.  Coping strategies.   Efforts to deal with stress.  Coprolalia.   Verbal tic in which an individual utters obscenities aloud.  Coronary heart disease (CHD).   Potentially lethal blockage of the arteries supplying blood to the heart muscle, or myocardium.  Corpus callosum.   Nerve fibers that connect the two hemispheres of the brain.  Correlation.   The tendency of two variables to change together. With positive correlation, as one variable goes up, so does the other; with
612   GLOSSARY  negative correlation, one variable goes up as the other goes down.  Correlation coefficient.   A statistic that ranges from +1.0 to –1.0 and reflects the degree of association between two variables. The magni- tude of the correlation indicates the strength of the association, and the sign indicates whether the correlation is positive or negative.  Correlational method/correlational research.   A research strategy that examines whether and how variables go together (covary) without manipulating (changing) any variables.  Corticovisceral control mechanisms.   Brain mechanisms that regulate autonomic and other bodily functions.  Cortisol.   Human stress hormone released by the cortex of the adrenal glands.  Counseling psychology.   Field of psychology that focuses on helping people with prob- lems pertaining to education, marriage, or occupation.  Countertransference.   Psychodynamic concept that the therapist brings personal issues, based on his or her own vulnerabilities and conflicts, to the therapeutic relationship.  Couple therapy.   Treatment for disordered interpersonal relationships involving sessions with both members of the relationship present and emphasizing mutual need gratification, social role expectations, communication pat- terns, and similar interpersonal factors.  Covert.   Concealed, disguised, not directly observable.  Covert sensitization.   Behavioral treatment method for extinguishing undesirable behavior by associating noxious mental images with that behavior.  Criminal responsibility.   Legal question of whether a person should be permitted to use insanity as a defense after having committed a crime.  Crisis.   Stressful situation that approaches or exceeds the adaptive capacities of an individual or a group.  Crisis intervention.   Provision of psychological help to an individual or a group in times of severe and special stress.  Criterion group.   Group of subjects who exhibit the disorder under study.  Cross-gender identification.   The desire to be, or the insistence that one is, of the opposite sex.  Cultural competence.   Refers to a psychologist’s need to be informed of the issues involved in multicultural assessment.  Cultural relativism.   Position that one cannot apply universal standards of normality or abnormality to all societies.  Cultural-familial retardation.   Mental retardation as a result of an inferior quality of interac- tion with the cultural environment and other people, with no evidence of brain pathology.  Cyclothymic disorder.   Mild mood disorder characterized by cyclical periods of hypomanic and depressive symptoms.  Cytokines.   Small protein molecules that enable the brain and the immune system to commu- nicate with each other. Cytokines can augment or enhance an immune system response or cause immunosuppression, depending on the specific cytokine that is released.  D  Day hospital.   Community-based mental hospi- tal where patients are treated during the day, returning to their homes at night.  Debriefing sessions.   Psychological debriefing is a brief, directive treatment method that is used in helping people who have undergone a traumatic situation. Debriefing sessions are usually conducted with small groups of trauma victims shortly after the incident for the pur- pose of helping them deal with the emotional residuals of the event.  Defense mechanism.   See   Ego-defense mechanism .  Defense-oriented response.   Behavior directed primarily at protecting the self from hurt and disorganization rather than at resolving the situation.  Deinstitutionalization.   Movement to close mental hospitals and treat people with severe mental disorder in the community.  Delayed ejaculation disorder.   Retarded ejacula- tion, or the inability to ejaculate following a normal sexual excitement phase.  Delinquency.   Antisocial or illegal behavior by a minor.  Delirium.   State of mental confusion character- ized by relatively rapid onset of widespread disorganization of the higher mental processes, caused by a generalized disturbance in brain metabolism. May include impaired perception, memory, and thinking and abnormal psycho- motor activity.  Delirium tremens.   See   Alcohol withdrawal delirium .  Delusion.   False belief about reality maintained in spite of strong evidence to the contrary.  Delusion of grandeur.   False belief that one is a noted or famous person, such as Napoleon or the Virgin Mary.  Delusion of persecution.   False belief that one is being mistreated or interfered with by one’s enemies.  Delusional disorder.   Nurturing, giving voice to, and sometimes taking action on beliefs that are considered completely false by others; formerly called   paranoia.  Delusional system.   Internally coherent, system- atized pattern of delusions.  Dementia.   Progressive deterioration of brain functioning occurring after the completion of brain maturation in adolescence. Characterized by deficits in memory, abstract thinking, acquisition of new knowledge or skills, visuo- spatial comprehension, motor control, prob- lem solving, and judgment.  Dementia of the Alzheimer’s type (DAT).   Disorder associated with a progressive dementia syndrome ultimately terminating in death. Onset may be in middle or old age, and symptoms include memory loss, withdrawal, confusion, and impaired judgment.  Dementia praecox.   Older term for schizophrenia.  Demonology.   Viewpoint emphasizing super- natural causation of mental disorder, especially “possession” by evil spirits or forces.  Denial of reality.   Ego-defense mechanism that protects the self from an unpleasant reality by refusing to perceive or face it.  Dependence.   Tendency to rely overly on others.  Dependent personality disorder.   Extreme dependence on others, particularly the need to be taken care of, leading to clinging and sub- missive behavior.  Dependent variable.   In an experiment, the fac- tor that is observed to change with changes in the manipulated (independent) variables.  Depersonalization.   Temporary loss of sense of one’s own self and one’s own reality.  Depersonalization disorder.   Dissociative disor- der in which episodes of depersonalization and derealization become persistent and recurrent.  Depression.   Emotional state characterized by extraordinary sadness and dejection.  Depressive personality disorder.   Provisional category of personality disorder in   DSM- IV-TR   that involves a pattern of depressive cognitions and behaviors that begin by early adulthood and is pervasive in nature.  Depressogenic schemas.   Dysfunctional beliefs that are rigid, extreme, and counterproductive and that are thought to leave one susceptible to depression when experiencing stress.  Derealization.   Experience in which the external world is perceived as distorted and lacking a stable and palpable existence.  Desensitization.   Therapeutic process by means of which reactions to traumatic experiences are reduced in intensity by repeatedly exposing a person to them in mild form, either in reality or in fantasy.  Desire phase.   First phase of the human sexual response, consisting of fantasies about sexual activity or a sense of desire to have sexual activity.  Deterrence.   Premise that punishment for crimi- nal offenses will deter that criminal and others from future criminal acts.  Detox center.   Center or facility for receiving and detoxifying alcohol or drug-intoxicated individuals.
GLOSSARY   613  Detoxification.   Treatment directed toward rid- ding the body of alcohol or other drugs.  Developmental disorder.   Problem that is rooted in deviations in the development pro- cess itself, thus disrupting the acquisition of skills and adaptive behavior and often inter- fering with the transition to well-functioning adulthood.  Developmental psychopathology.   Field of psy- chology that focuses on determining what is abnormal at any point in the developmental process by comparing and contrasting it with normal and expected changes that occur.  Developmental systems approach.   Acknowledgment that genetic activity influences neural activity, which in turn influences behavior, which in turn influ- ences the environment, and that these influ- ences are bidirectional.  Deviant behavior.   Behavior that deviates mark- edly from the average or norm.  Diagnosis.   Determination of the nature and extent of a specific disorder.  Dialectical behavior therapy.   A unique kind of cognitive and behavioral therapy specifically adapted for treating borderline personality disorder.  Diathesis.   Predisposition or vulnerability to developing a given disorder.  Diathesis-stress model.   View of abnormal behavior as the result of stress operating on an individual who has a biological, psychosocial, or sociocultural predisposition to developing a specific disorder.  Dimensional approach.   Approach to classify- ing abnormal behavior that assumes that a person’s typical behavior is the product of differing strengths or intensities of behavior along several definable dimensions, such as mood, emotional stability, aggressiveness, gen- der, identity, anxiousness, interpersonal trust, clarity of thinking and communication, social introversion, and so on.  Direct observation.   Method of collecting research data that involves directly observing behavior in a given situation.  Direction of effect problem.   Refers to the fact that, in correlational research, it cannot be concluded whether variable A causes variable B or whether variable B causes variable A.  Directive therapy.   Type of therapeutic approach in which a therapist supplies direct answers to problems and takes much of the responsibility for the progress of therapy.  Disaster syndrome.   Reactions of many victims of major catastrophes during the traumatic experience and the initial and long-lasting reactions after it.  Discordant marriage.   Marriage in which one or both of the partners are not gaining satis- faction from the relationship and one spouse may express frustration and disillusionment in hostile ways, such as nagging, belittling, and purposely doing things to annoy the other.  Discrimination.   Ability to interpret and respond differently to two or more similar stimuli.  Disintegration.   Loss of organization or integra- tion in any organized system.  Disorganization.   Severely impaired integration.  Disorganized schizophrenia.   See  Schizophrenia, disorganized type .  Disorganized symptoms.   Symptoms such as bizarre behavior or incomprehensible speech.  Disorientation.   Mental confusion with respect to time, place, or person.  Displacement.   Ego-defense mechanism that discharges pent-up feelings, often of hostility, on objects less dangerous than those arousing the feelings.  Disrupted family.   Family that is incomplete as a result of death, divorce, separation, or some other circumstance.  Dissociation.   The human mind’s capacity to mediate complex mental activity in channels split off from or independent of conscious awareness.  Dissociative amnesia.   Psychogenically caused memory failure.  Dissociative disorders.   Conditions involving a disruption in an individual’s normally inte- grated functions of consciousness, memory, or identity.  Dissociative fugue.   A dissociative amnesic state in which the person is not only amnesic for some or all aspects of his or her past but also departs from home surroundings.  Dissociative identity disorder (DID).   Condition in which a person manifests at least two or more distinct identities or personality states that alternate in some way in taking control of behavior. Formerly called   multiple personality disorder.  Distress.   Negative stress, associated with pain, anxiety, or sorrow.  Disturbed family.   Family in which one or both parents behave in grossly eccentric or abnor- mal ways and may keep the home in constant emotional turmoil.  Dizygotic (fraternal) twins.   Twins that develop from two separate eggs.  DNA.   Deoxyribonucleic acid; principal compo- nent of genes.  Dominant gene.   A gene whose hereditary char- acteristics prevail, in of-spring, over any reces- sive gene that affects the same trait.  Dopamine.   Neurotransmitter from the catechol- amine family that is initially synthesized from tyrosine, an amino acid common in the diet. Dopamine is produced from l-dopa by the enzyme dopamine decarboxylase.  Dopamine hypothesis.   Hypothesis that schizo- phrenia is the result of an excess of dopamine activity at certain synaptic sites.  Double bind.   Situation in which a person will be disapproved for performing a given act and equally disapproved if he or she does not perform it.  Double depression.   This condition is diagnosed when a person with dysthymia has a superim- posed major depressive episode.  Double-bind communication.   Type of faulty communication in which one person (e.g., a parent) presents to another (e.g., a child) ideas, feelings, and demands that are mutually incompatible.  Double-blind study.   Often used in studies examining drug treatment effects, a condition where neither the subject nor the experi- menter has knowledge about what specific experimental condition (or drug) the subject is receiving.  Down syndrome.   Form of moderate-to-severe mental retardation associated with a chromo- somal abnormality and typically accompanied by characteristic physical features.  Dream analysis.   Method involving the record- ing, description, and interpretation of a patient’s dreams.  Drive.   Internal conditions directing an organ- ism toward a specific goal, often involving biological rather than psychological motives.  Drug abuse.   Use of a drug to the extent that it interferes with health and/or occupational or social adjustment.  Drug addiction (dependence).   Physiological or psychological dependence on a drug.  DSM-5.   Current diagnostic manual of the American Psychiatric Association.  Dwarfism.   Condition of arrested growth and very short stature.  Dyad.   Two-person group.  Dynamic formulation.   Integrated evaluation of an individual’s personality traits, behavior pat- terns, environmental demands, and the like to describe the person’s current situation and to hypothesize about what is driving the person to behave in maladaptive ways.  Dysfunction.   Impairment or disturbance in the functioning of an organ or in behavior.  Dysfunctional beliefs.   Negative beliefs that are rigid, extreme, and counterproductive.  Dyslexia.   Impairment of the ability to read.  Dyspareunia.   Painful coitus in a male or a female.  Dysrhythmia.   Abnormal brain wave pattern.  Dysthymic disorder.   Moderately severe mood disorder characterized by a persistently depressed mood most of the day for more days than not for at least 2 years. Additional symptoms may include poor appetite, sleep disturbance, lack of energy, low self-esteem, difficulty concentrating, and feelings of hopelessness.
614   GLOSSARY  E  Early-onset Alzheimer’s disease.   Form of Alzheimer’s disease that appears in people who are younger than approximately 60 years of age. Thought to be caused by rare genetic mutations.  Eating disorder not otherwise specified (EDNOS).   A diagnostic category reserved for disorders of eating that do not meet criteria for any other specific eating disorder.  Eating disorders.   Disorders of food ingestion, regurgitation, or attitude that affect health and well-being, such as anorexia, bulimia, or binge eating.  Echolalia.   Parrot-like repetition of a few words or phrases.  Ecstasy.   A human manufactured drug that is taken orally and acts as both a stimulant and a hallucinogen. The drug effects include feel- ings of mental stimulation, emotional warmth, enhanced sensory perception, and increased physical energy.  Edema.   Swelling of tissues.  EEG.   See   Electroencephalogram .  Effect size.   A statistical term referring to the strength of the relationship between two vari- ables in a statistical population.  Efficacy.   In a situation where treatment is tested under ideal conditions (usually in a controlled clinical trial) efficacy is how well a given treat- ment improves clinical outcome compared to a control or comparison condition.  Ego.   In psychoanalytic theory, the rational part of the personality that mediates between the demands of the id, the constraints of the superego, and the realities of the external world.  Ego psychology.   Psychodynamic theory empha- sizing the importance of the ego—the “execu- tive branch of the personality”—in organizing normal personality development.  Egocentric.   Preoccupied with one’s own con- cerns and relatively insensitive to the concerns of others.  Ego-defense mechanisms.   Psychic mechanisms that discharge or soothe anxiety rather than coping directly with an anxiety-provoking situ- ation; usually unconscious and reality distort- ing. Also called   defense mechanisms.  Electra complex.   Excessive emotional attach- ment (love) of a daughter for her father; the female counterpart of the Oedipus complex.  Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT).   Use of electric- ity to produce convulsions and unconscious- ness; a treatment used primarily to alleviate depressive and manic episodes. Also known as  electroshock therapy.  Electroencephalogram (EEG).   Graphical record of the brain’s electrical activity obtained by placing electrodes on the scalp and measuring the brain wave impulses from various brain areas.  Embolism.   Lodgment of a blood clot in a blood vessel too small to permit its passage.  Emotion.   Strong feeling accompanied by physi- ological changes.  Emotional disturbance.   Psychological disorder.  Empathy.   Ability to understand, and to some extent share, the state of mind of another person.  Encephalitis.   Inflammation of the brain.  Encopresis.   Disorder in children who have not learned appropriate toileting for bowel move- ments after age 4.  Encounter group.   Small group designed to provide an intensive interpersonal experi- ence focusing on feelings and group interac- tions; used in therapy or to promote personal growth.  Endocrine glands.   Ductless glands that secrete hormones directly into the lymph or bloodstream.  Endogenous factors.   Factors originating within an organism that affect behavior.  Endophenotypes.   Discrete, measurable traits that are thought to be linked to specific genes that might be important in schizophrenia or other mental disorders.  Endorphins.   Opiates produced in the brain and throughout the body that function like neurotransmitters to dampen pain sensations. They also play a role in the body’s building up tolerance to certain drugs.  Enuresis.   Bed-wetting; involuntary discharge of urine after the age of expected continence (age 5).  Environmental psychology.   Field of psychol- ogy focusing on the effects of an environ- mental setting on an individual’s feelings and behavior.  Epidemiological studies.   Attempts to establish the pattern of occurrence of certain (mental) disorders in different times, places, and groups of people.  Epidemiology.   Study of the distribution of dis- eases, disorders, or health-related behaviors in a given population. Mental health epidemiol- ogy is the study of the distribution of mental disorders.  Epilepsy.   Group of disorders varying from momentary lapses of consciousness to general- ized convulsions.  Epinephrine.   Hormone secreted by the adrenal medulla; also called   adrenaline.  Episodic.   Term used to describe a disorder that tends to abate and recur.  Equilibrium.   Steady state; balance.  Erotic.   Pertaining to sexual stimulation and gratification.  Escape learning.   Instrumental response in which a subject learns to terminate or escape an aversive stimulus.  Essential hypertension.   High blood pressure with no specific known physical cause.  Estrogens.   Female hormones produced by the ovaries.  Ethnic group.   Group of people who are treated as distinctive in terms of culture and group patterns.  Etiology.   Factors that are related to the devel- opment (or cause) of a particular disorder.  Euphoria.   Exaggerated feeling of well-being and contentment.  Eustress.   Positive stress.  Evidence-based treatment.   Treatment that has been demonstrated to be superior to a stan- dard comparison treatment or to placebo in a randomized controlled trial.  Exacerbate.   Intensify.  Excitement (arousal) phase.   Second phase of the human sexual response, in which there is generally a subjective sense of sexual pleasure and physiological changes, including penile erection in the male and vaginal lubrication and enlargement in the female.  Exhaustion.   Selye’s third and final stage of responding to continued excessive trauma, in which a person’s adaptive resources are depleted and the coping patterns developed during the resistance stage fail.  Exhibitionism.   Intentional exposure of one’s genitals to others under inappropriate circum- stances and without their consent.  Existential anxiety.   Anxiety concerning one’s ability to find a satisfying and fulfilling way of life.  Existential neurosis.   Disorder characterized by feelings of alienation, meaninglessness, and apathy.  Existential psychotherapy.   Type of therapy that is based on existential thought and focuses on individual uniqueness and authenticity on the part of both client and therapist.  Existentialism.   View of human beings that emphasizes an individual’s responsibility for becoming the kind of person he or she should be.  Exogenous.   Originating from or due to external causes.  Exorcism.   Religiously inspired treatment proce- dure designed to drive out evil spirits or forces from a “possessed” person.  Experimental group.   Group of subjects used to assess the effects of independent variables.  Experimental method.   Rigorous scientific pro- cedure by which hypotheses are tested.  Experimental research.   Research that involves the manipulation of a given factor or variable with everything else held constant.  Exposure and response prevention.   A method of treatment for obsessive-compulsive disorder that combines intense exposure of the patient to feared conditions and then they are asked not to respond by engaging in their usual ritu- als to the feared stimuli.
GLOSSARY   615  Exposure therapy.   A technique in psychological treatment of anxiety disorders that involves exposing the patient to the feared object or context without any danger in order to over- come the anxiety.  Expressed emotion (EE).   Type of negative communication involving excessive criticism and emotional overinvolvement directed at a patient by family members.  External validity.   The extent to which the find- ings from a single study are relevant to other populations, contexts, or times.  Exteroceptive conditioning.   Modifying the perception of environmental stimuli acting on the body.  Extinction.   Gradual disappearance of a con- ditioned response when it is no longer reinforced.  Extraversion.   Direction of interest toward the outer world of people and things rather than toward concepts and intellectual concerns.  F  Factitious disorder.   Feigning of symptoms to maintain the personal benefits that a sick role may provide, including the attention and con- cern of medical personnel or family members.  Factitious disorder by proxy.   A variant of factitious disorder in which a person induces medical or psychological symptoms in another person who is under his or her care (usually a child).  Factor analysis.   Statistical technique used for reducing a large array of inter-correlated measures to the minimum number of factors necessary to account for the observed overlap or associations among them.  Fading.   Technique whereby a stimulus caus- ing some reaction is gradually replaced by a previously neutral stimulus such that the latter acquires the property of producing the reac- tion in question.  False memories.   “Memories” of events that did not actually happen, often produced by highly leading and suggestive techniques.  Familial.   Pertaining to characteristics that tend to run in families and have a higher inci- dence in certain families than in the general population.  Family aggregation.   The clustering of certain traits, behaviors, or disorders within a given family. Family aggregation may arise because of genetic or environmental similarities.  Family history method.   Behavior genetic research strategy that examines the incidence of disorder in relatives of an index case to determine whether incidence increases in proportion to the degree of the hereditary relationship.  Family systems approach.   Form of interper- sonal therapy focusing on the within-family behavior of a particular family member and the assumption that it is largely influenced by the behaviors and communication patterns of other family members.  Family therapy.   A treatment approach that includes all family members, not just the iden- tified patient.  Fantasy.   Daydream; also, an ego-defense mech- anism by means of which a person escapes from the world of reality and gratifies his or her desires in fantasy achievements.  Fear.   A basic emotion that involves the activa- tion of the “fight-or-flight” response of the sympathetic nervous system.  Feedback.   Explicit information pertaining to internal physiological processes or to the social consequences of one’s overt behavior.  Female orgasmic disorder.   Persistent or recur- rent delay in, or absence of, orgasm after a normal sexual excitement phase.  Female sexual arousal disorder.   Sexual dysfunc- tion involving an absence of sexual arousal and unresponsiveness to most or all forms of erotic stimulation.  Fetal alcohol syndrome.   Observed pattern in infants born to alcoholic mothers in which there is a characteristic facial or limb irregularity, low body weight, and behavioral abnormality.  Fetishism.   Sexual variant in which sexual inter- est centers on some inanimate object or non- sexual part of the body.  Fetus.   Embryo after the sixth week following conception.  Fixation.   Ego-defense mechanism involving an unreasonable or exaggerated attachment to some person or arresting of emotional devel- opment on a childhood or adolescent level.  Fixed-interval schedule.   Schedule of reinforce- ment based on a fixed period of time after the previous reinforced response.  Fixed-ratio schedule.   Schedule of reinforcement based on reinforcement after a fixed number of nonreinforced responses.  Flashback.   Involuntary recurrence of perceptual distortions or hallucinations weeks or months after taking a drug; in posttraumatic stress dis- order, a dissociative state in which the person briefly relives the traumatic experience.  Flat affect.   The lack of emotional expression.  Flooding.   Anxiety-eliciting therapeutic tech- nique involving having a client repeatedly experience the actual internal or external stimuli that had been identified as producing anxiety reactions.   Folie à deux . See   Shared psychotic disorder .  Follow-up study.   Research procedure in which people are studied over a period of time or are recontacted at a later time after an initial study.  Forensic.   Pertaining or used in the court of law.  Forensic psychology and psychiatry.   Branches of psychology and psychiatry dealing with legal problems related to mental disorders and the legal rights and protection of mental patients and members of society at large.  Fraternal twins.   Dizygotic twins; fertilized by separate germ cells, thus not having the same genetic inheritance. May be of the same or of opposite sexes.  Free association.   Method for probing the unconscious by having patients talk freely about themselves, their feelings, and their motives.  Free-floating anxiety.   Anxiety not referable to any specific situation or cause.  Frontal lobe.   Portion of the brain active in rea- soning and other higher thought processes.  Frotteurism.   A term that refers to interest in rubbing, usually one’s pelvis or erect penis, against a non-consenting person for sexual gratification.  Frustration.   Thwarting of a need or desire.  Frustration tolerance.   Ability to withstand frustration without becoming impaired psychologically.  Fugue.   Dissociative disorder that entails loss of memory for personal information accompa- nied by actual physical fight from one’s pres- ent life situation to a new environment or a less threatening former one.  Functional mental disorders.   Outdated term used to refer to disorders that were not consid- ered to have an organic basis.  Functional MRI (fMRI).   Internal scanning tech- nique that measures changes in local oxygen- ation (blood flow) to specific areas of brain tissue that in turn depend on neuronal activity in those specific regions, allowing the mapping of psychological activity such as sensations, images, and thoughts.  Functional psychoses.   Severe mental disorders for which a specific organic pathology has not been demonstrated.  G  Gambling.   Wagering on games or events in which chance largely determines the outcome.  Gender dysphoria.   Persistent discomfort about one’s biological sex or the sense that the gen- der role of that sex is inappropriate.  Gender identity.   Individual’s identification as being male or female.  Gender identity disorder.   Identification with members of the opposite sex, persistent discomfort with one’s biological sexual identity, and strong desire to change to the opposite sex.  General adaptation syndrome.   A model that helps explain the course of a person’s biologi- cal deterioration under excessive stress; consists of three stages (alarm reaction, stage of resis- tance, and exhaustion).  General paresis.   Mental disorder associated with syphilis of the brain.
616   GLOSSARY  Generalizability.   The extent to which the find- ings from a single study can be used to draw conclusions about other samples.  Generalization.   Tendency of a response that has been conditioned to one stimulus to be elic- ited by other, similar stimuli.  Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).   Chronic excessive worry about a number of events or activities, with no specific threat present, accompanied by at least three of the following symptoms: restlessness, fatigue, difficulty con- centrating, irritability, muscle tension, sleep disturbance.  Genes.   Long molecules of DNA that are pres- ent at various locations on chromosomes and that are responsible for the transmission of hereditary traits.  Genetic code.   Means by which DNA controls the sequence and structure of proteins manu- factured within each cell and also makes exact duplicates of itself.  Genetic counseling.   Counseling prospective parents concerning the probability of their having impaired offspring as a result of genetic defects.  Genetic inheritance.   Potential for development and behavior determined at conception by egg and sperm cells.  Genetics.   Science of the inheritance of traits and the mechanisms of this inheritance.  Genital stage.   In psychoanalytic theory, the final stage of psychosexual development, involving a shift from autoeroticism to hetero- sexual interest.  Genitalia.   Organs of reproduction, especially the external organs.  Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.  Recurring difficulties of vaginal penetration or pelvic pain during intercourse.  Genotype.   A person’s total genetic endowment.  Genotype–environment correlation.   Genotypic vulnerability that can shape a child’s environ- mental experiences.  Genotype–environment interaction.   Differential sensitivity or susceptibility to their environ- ments by people who have different genotypes.  Geriatrics.   Science of the diseases and treatment of the aged.  Germ cells.   Reproductive cells (female ovum and male sperm) that unite to produce a new individual.  Gerontology.   Science dealing with the study of old age.  Gestalt psychology.   School of psychology that emphasizes patterns rather than elements or connections, taking the view that the whole is more than the sum of its parts.  Gestalt therapy.   Therapy designed to increase the integration of thoughts, feelings, and actions and to promote self-awareness and self-acceptance.  Glucocorticoids.   Adrenocortical hormones involved in sugar metabolism but also having widespread effects on injury-repair mecha- nisms and resistance to disease; they include cortisol.  Glutamate.   An excitatory neurotransmitter that is widespread throughout the brain.  Gonads.   Sex glands.  Good premorbid schizophrenia.   See   Reactive schizophrenia .  Grehlin.   Grehlin is a hormone that is produced by the stomach. It stimulates appetite.  Group therapy.   Psychotherapy administered to several people at the same time.  Guilt.   Feelings of culpability arising from behavior or desires contrary to one’s ethi- cal principles. Involves both self-devaluation and apprehension growing out of fears of punishment.  Guilty but mentally ill (GBMI).   Plea and pos- sible verdict that would provide an alternative to pleading not guilty by reason of insanity (NGRI) and would allow for placing a defen- dant in a treatment facility rather than in a prison.  H  Habituation.   Automatic process whereby a person’s response to the same stimulus lessens with repeated presentations.  Half-life.   Time taken for the level of an active drug or medication in the body to be reduced to 50 percent of the original level.  Halfway house.   Facility that provides aftercare following institutionalization, seeking to ease a person’s adjustment to the community.  Hallucinations.   False perceptions such as things seen or heard that are not real or present.  Hallucinogens.   Drugs known to induce halluci- nations; often referred to as psychedelics.  Hallucinosis.   Persistent hallucinations in the presence of known or suspected organic brain pathology.  Hashish.   Strongest drug derived from the hemp plant; a relative of marijuana that is usually smoked.  Health maintenance organization (HMO).  Health plan that provides services to employ- ers and individuals for a fixed, prepaid fee.  Health psychology.   Subspecialty within behav- ioral medicine that deals with psychology’s contributions to diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of psychological components of physical dysfunction.  Hebephrenic schizophrenia.   See   Schizophrenia, disorganized type .  Hemiplegia.   Paralysis of one lateral half of the body.  Heredity.   Genetic transmission of characteristics from parents to their children.  Hermaphroditism.   Anatomical sexual abnormal- ity in which a person has some sex organs of both sexes.  Heroin.   Powerful psychoactive drug, chemi- cally derived from morphine, that relieves pain but is even more intense and addictive than morphine.  Heterosexuality.   Sexual interest in a member of the opposite sex.  Hierarchy of needs.   Concept, articulated by Maslow, that needs arrange themselves in a hierarchy in terms of importance from the most basic biological needs to those psycho- logical needs concerned with self-actualization.  High-risk.   Term applied to persons show- ing great vulnerability to physical or mental disorders.  Histrionic personality disorder.   Excessive attention seeking, emotional instability, and self-dramatization.  HIV-associated dementia.   A progressive brain deterioration that is caused by infection from the HIV virus.  HIV-associated neurocognitive impair- ment.   Mild or major neurocognitive disorder caused by infection with the human immuno- deficiency virus (HIV).  Hoarding disorder.   A new   DSM-5   diagnosis characterized by long-standing difficulties dis- carding possessions, even those of little value.  Homeostasis.   Tendency of organisms to main- tain conditions that make possible a constant level of physiological functioning.  Homosexuality.   Sexual preference for a member of one’s own sex.  Hormones.   Chemical messengers secreted by endocrine glands that regulate development of and activity in various parts of the body.  Host identity (personality).   The identity in dis- sociative identity disorder which is most fre- quently encountered and carries the person’s real name. This is not usually the original identity and it may or may not be the best adjusted identity.  Hostility.   Emotional reaction or drive toward the destruction or damage of an object inter- preted as a source of frustration or threat.  HPA axis.   The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is a hormonal feedback system that becomes activated by stress and results in the production of cortisol.  Humanistic perspective.   Approach to under- standing abnormal behavior that views basic human nature as good and emphasizes people’s inherent capacity for growth and self-actualization.  Humanistic-experiential therapies.   Psycho- therapies emphasizing personal growth and self-direction.  Huntington’s disease.   A rare and fatal degen- erative disorder which is manifested in jerking, twitching movements, and mental
GLOSSARY   617  deterioration. Caused by a dominant gene on chromosome 4. Formerly called   Huntington’s chorea.  Hydrocephaly.   Relatively rare condition in which the accumulation of an abnormal amount of cerebrospinal fluid within the cra- nium causes damage to the brain tissues and enlargement of the skull.  Hydrotherapy.   Use of hot or cold baths, ice packs, etc., in treatment.  Hyper-.   Prefix meaning “increased” or “excessive.”  Hyperactivity.   See   Attention-deficit/hyper- activity disorder .  Hyperobesity.   Extreme overweight; 100 pounds or more above ideal body weight.  Hypertension.   High blood pressure, defined as a persisting systolic blood pressure of 140 or more and a diastolic blood pressure of 90 or greater.  Hyperventilation.   Rapid breathing associated with intense anxiety.  Hypesthesia.   Partial loss of sensitivity.  Hypnosis.   Trance-like mental state induced in a cooperative subject by suggestion.  Hypnotherapy.   Use of hypnosis in psychotherapy.  Hypo-.   Prefix meaning “decreased” or “insufficient.”  Hypoactive sexual desire disorder.   Sexual dys- function in which either a man or a woman shows little or no sexual drive or interest.  Hypochondriacal delusions.   Delusions concern- ing various horrible disease conditions, such as the belief that one’s brain is turning to dust.  Hypochondriasis.   Preoccupation, based on mis- interpretations of bodily symptoms, with the fear that one has a serious disease.  Hypomania.   Mild form of mania.  Hypomanic episode.   A condition lasting at least 4 days in which a person experiences abnor- mally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood. At least three out of seven other designated symptoms similar to those in a manic episode must also be present but to a lesser degree than in mania.  Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA axis).   Brain endocrine system involved in responding to stress in which the hypothala- mus and pituitary send messages to the adrenal gland which releases a stress hormone that feeds back on the hypothalamus.  Hypothalamus.   Key structure at the base of the brain; important in emotion and motivation.  Hypothesis.   Statement or proposition, usu- ally based on observation, that is tested in an experiment; may be refuted or supported by experimental results but can never be conclu- sively proved.  Hypoxia.   Insufficient delivery of oxygen to an organ, especially the brain.  Hysteria.   Older term used for conversion dis- orders; involves the appearance of symptoms of organic illness in the absence of any related organic pathology.  I  Id.   In psychoanalytic theory, the reservoir of instinctual drives and the first structure to appear in infancy.  Identical twins.   Monozygotic twins; developed from a single fertilized egg.  Identification.   Ego-defense mechanism in which a person identifies himself or herself with some person or institution, usually of an illustrious nature.  Ideology.   System of beliefs.  Illusion.   Misinterpretation of sensory data; false perception.  Imaginal exposure.   Form of exposure therapy that does not involve a real stimulus. Instead, the patient is asked to imagine the feared stimulus or situation.  Immaturity.   Pattern of childhood maladaptive behaviors suggesting lack of adaptive skills.  Immune reaction.   Complex defensive reaction initiated on detection of an antigen invading the body.  Immune system.   The body’s principal means of defending itself against the intrusion of foreign substances.  Immunosuppression.   A downregulation or dampening of the immune system. This can be short or long term and can be triggered by injury, stress, illness, and other factors.  Implicit memory.   Memory that occurs below the conscious level.  Implicit perception.   Perception that occurs below the conscious level.  In vivo exposure.   Exposure that takes place in a real-life situation as opposed to the therapeutic or laboratory setting.  Incentive.   External inducement to behave in a certain way.  Incest.   Culturally prohibited sexual relations between family members, such as a brother and sister or a parent and child.  Incidence.   Occurrence (onset) rate of a given disorder in a given population.  Independent variable.   Factor whose effects are being examined and which is manipulated in some way, while other variables are held constant.  Index case.   In a genetic study, an individual who evidences the trait in which the investiga- tor is interested. Same as   proband.  Indicated intervention.   Early detection and prompt treatment of maladaptive behavior in a person’s family and community setting.  Infantile autism.   See   Autism .  Inhibition.   Restraint of impulse or desire.  Innate.   Inborn.  Inpatient.   Hospitalized patient.  Insanity.   Legal term for mental disorder, imply- ing lack of responsibility for one’s acts and inability to manage one’s affairs.  Insanity defense (NGRI).   The not guilty by rea- son of insanity plea used as a legal defense in criminal trials.  Insight.   Clinically, a person’s understanding of his or her illness or of the motivations under- lying a behavior pattern; in general psychol- ogy, the sudden grasp or understanding of meaningful relationships in a situation.  Insight therapy.   Type of psychotherapy that focuses on helping a client achieve greater self-understanding with respect to his or her motives, values, coping patterns, and so on.  Insomnia.   Difficulty in sleeping.  Instinct.   Inborn tendency to perform particular behavior patterns under certain conditions in the absence of learning.  Instrumental (operant) conditioning.   Rein- forcement of a subject for making a correct response that leads either to receipt of some- thing rewarding or to escape from something unpleasant.  Insulin coma therapy.   Physiological treatment for schizophrenia that is rarely used today; it involved administration of increasing amounts of insulin until the patient went into shock.  Integrative behavioral couple therapy.   Modi- fication of traditional behavioral couple therapy that has a focus on acceptance of the partner rather than being solely change oriented.  Intellectual disability.   A disorder with onset during the developmental period that includes intellectual and adaptive functioning.  Intellectualization.   Ego-defense mechanism by which a person achieves some measure of insu- lation from emotional hurt by cutting of or distorting the emotional charge that normally accompanies hurtful situations.  Intelligence.   The ability to learn, reason, and adapt.  Intelligence quotient (IQ).   Measurement of “intelligence” expressed as a number or posi- tion on a scale.  Intelligence test.   Test used in establishing a subject’s level of intellectual capability.  Intensive care management (ICM).   Use of multidisciplinary teams with limited caseloads to ensure that discharged patients do not get overlooked and “lost” in the system.  Interdisciplinary (multidisciplinary) approach.   Integration of various scientific disciplines in understanding, assessing, treat- ing, and preventing mental disorders.  Intermittent reinforcement.   Reinforcement given intermittently rather than after every response.  Internal validity.   The extent to which a study is free of confounds, is methodologically sound,
618   GLOSSARY  and allows the researcher to have confidence in the findings.  International Classification of Diseases (ICD- 10).   System of classification of disorders pub- lished by the World Health Organization.  Interoceptive conditioning.   This term refers to a learning process that is similar to classic con- ditioning. There are two conditioned stimuli and one unconditioned response.  Interoceptive fears.   Fear of various internal bodily sensations.  Interpersonal accommodation.   Process through which two people develop patterns of commu- nication and interaction that enable them to attain common goals, meet mutual needs, and build a satisfying relationship.  Interpersonal perspective.   Approach to under- standing abnormal behavior that views much of psychopathology as rooted in the unfortu- nate tendencies we develop while dealing with our interpersonal environments; it thus focuses on our relationships, past and present, with other people.  Interpersonal therapy (IPT).   A time-limited psychotherapy approach that focuses on the interpersonal context and on building inter- personal skills.  Intrapsychic conflict.   Inner mental struggles resulting from the interplay of the id, ego, and superego when the three subsystems are striv- ing for different goals.  Introjection.   Internal process by which a child incorporates symbolically, through images and memories, important people in his or her life.  Intromission.   Insertion of the penis into the vagina or anus.  Introspection.   Observing (and often reporting on) one’s inner experiences.  Introversion.   Direction of interest toward one’s inner world of experience and toward concepts rather than external events and objects or people.  Ionizing radiation.   Form of radiation; major cause of gene mutations.  Isolation.   Ego-defense mechanism by means of which contradictory attitudes or feelings that normally accompany particular attitudes are kept apart, thus preventing conflict or hurt.  J  Juvenile delinquency.   Legal term used to refer to illegal acts committed by minors.  Juvenile paresis.   General paresis in children, usually of congenital origin.  K  Klinefelter’s syndrome.   Type of mental retarda- tion associated with sex chromosome anomaly.  Korsakoff’s syndrome.   This disorder, also referred to as Korsakoff’s dementia, Korsakoff’s psychosis, or amnesic-confabu- latory syndrome, is a neurological condition resulting from chronic alcohol abuse and severe malnutrition (vitamin B).  L  La belle indifférence.   The unconcern about serious illness or disability that is sometimes characteristic of conversion disorder.  Labeling.   Assigning a person to a particular diagnostic category, such as schizophrenia.  Lability.   Instability, particularly with regard to affect.  Latency stage.   In psychoanalytic theory, a stage of psychosexual development during which sexual motivations recede in importance and a child is preoccupied with developing skills and other activities.  Latent.   Inactive or dormant.  Latent content.   In psychoanalytic theory, repressed actual motives of a dream that are seeking expression but are so painful or unac- ceptable that they are disguised by the mani- fest content of the dream.  Late-onset Alzheimer’s disease.   The occurrence of Alzheimer’s disease in the more elderly. One gene thought to be involved in this form of Alzheimer’s disease is the APOE gene.  Law of effect.   Principle that responses that have rewarding consequences are strengthened and those that have aversive consequences are weakened or eliminated.  Learned helplessness.   A theory that animals and people exposed to uncontrollable aver- sive events learn that they have no control over these events and this causes them to behave in a passive and helpless manner when later exposed to potentially controllable events. Later extended to become a theory of depression.  Learning.   Modification of behavior as a conse- quence of experience.  Learning disabled (LD).   Term used to describe children who exhibit deficits in academic skills.  Learning disorders.   A set of disorders that reflect deficits in academic performance.  Leptin.   Leptin is a hormone produced by fat cells that acts to reduce food intake.  Lesbian.   Female homosexual person.  Lesion.   Anatomically localized area of tissue pathology in an organ or a part of the brain.  Lethality scale.   Criteria used to assess the likeli- hood of a person’s committing suicide.  Leukocytes.   See   Lymphocytes .  Libido.   In psychoanalytic theory, a term used to describe the instinctual drives of the id; the basic constructive energy of life, primarily sexual in nature.  Life crisis.   Stress situation that approaches or exceeds a person’s capacity to adjust.  Life history method.   Technique of psychologi- cal observation in which the development of particular forms of behavior is traced by means of records of a subject’s past or pres- ent behavior.  Lifestyle.   General pattern of assumptions, motives, cognitive styles, and coping tech- niques that characterize a person’s behavior and give it consistency.  Lifetime prevalence.   The proportion of living persons in a population who have ever had a disorder up to the time of the epidemiological assessment.  Linkage analysis.   Genetic research strategy in which occurrence of a disorder in an extended family is compared with that of a genetic marker for a physical characteristic or biologi- cal process that is known to be located on a particular chromosome.  Lithium.   A common salt that consists of a soft, silver-white metal; it has been found to reduce the symptoms of bipolar disorder although it has a number of negative side-effects.  Lobotomy.   See   Prefrontal lobotomy .  Locomotor ataxia.   Muscular incoordination usually resulting from syphilitic damage to the spinal cord pathways.  Longitudinal design.   A research design in which people are followed over time.  LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide).   The most potent of the hallucinogens. It is odorless, colorless, and tasteless, and an amount smaller than a grain of salt can produce intoxication.  Lunacy.   Old term roughly synonymous with  insanity.  Lycanthropy.   Delusion of being a wolf.  Lymphocyte.   Generalized term for white blood cells involved in immune protection.  M  Macrocephaly.   Rare type of mental retarda- tion characterized by an increase in the size and weight of the brain, enlargement of the skull, visual impairment, convulsions, and other neurological symptoms resulting from abnormal growth of glial cells that form the supporting structure for brain tissue.  Macrophage.   Literally, “big eater.” A white blood cell that destroys antigens by engulfment.  Madness.   Nontechnical term for severe mental disorder.  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).   Internal scanning technique involving measurement of variations in magnetic fields that allows visu- alization of the anatomical features of internal organs, including the central nervous system and particularly the brain.  Mainstreaming.   Placement of mentally retarded children in regular school classrooms for all or part of the day.  Major depressive disorder.   Moderate-to-severe mood disorder in which a person experi- ences only major depressive episodes but no hypomanic, manic, or mixed episodes.   Single
GLOSSARY   619  episode   if only one;   recurrent episode   if more than one.  Major depressive episode.   A mental condition in which a person must be markedly depressed for most of every day for most days for at least 2 weeks. In addition, a total of at least five out of nine designated symptoms must also be present during the same time period.  Major depressive episode with atypical fea- tures.   A type of major depressive episode which includes a pattern of symptoms char- acterized by marked mood reactivity, as well as at least two out of four other designated symptoms.  Major depressive episode with catatonic fea- tures.   A subset of major depressive disorders that is characterized by severe disturbances in motor function.  Major depressive episode with melancholic features.   A type of major depressive episode which includes marked symptoms of loss of interest or pleasure in almost all activities, plus at least three of six other designated symptoms.  Major Neurocognitive Disorder.   A new   DSM-5  diagnosis, this involves severe impairment in cognitive functioning that reflects a significant decline from the person’s previous level of per- formance. The problems in cognitive function- ing create problems for the person in terms of their ability to perform routine activities.  Major tranquilizers.   Antipsychotic drugs, such as the phenothiazines.  Maladaptive (abnormal) behavior.   Behavior that is detrimental to the well-being of an indi- vidual or a group.  Maladjustment.   More or less enduring failure of adjustment; lack of harmony with self or environment.  Male erectile disorder.   Sexual dysfunction in which a male is unable to achieve or maintain an erection sufficient for successful sexual gratification; formerly known as impotence.  Male hypoactive sexual disorder.   Sexual dys- function in which a man shows little or no sexual drive or interest.  Malingering.   Consciously faking illness or symptoms of disability to achieve some specific nonmedical objective.  Managed health care.   System of corporations that secures services from hospitals, physicians, and other providers for treating a designated population, with the goal of holding down health-care cost.  Mania.   Emotional state characterized by intense and unrealistic feelings of excitement and euphoria.  Manic episode.   A condition in which a person shows markedly elevated, euphoric, or expan- sive mood, often interrupted by occasional outbursts of intense irritability or even vio- lence that lasts for at least 1 week. In addition, at least three out of seven other designated symptoms must also occur.  Manic-depressive psychoses.   Older term denot- ing a group of psychotic disorders character- ized by prolonged periods of excitement and overactivity (mania) or by periods of depres- sion and underactivity (depression) or by alternation of the two. Now known as   bipolar disorders.  Manifest content.   In psychoanalytic theory, the apparent (or obvious) meaning of a dream; masks the latent (or hidden) content.  Manualized therapy.   Standardization of psycho- social treatments (as in development of a man- ual) to fit the randomized clinical paradigm.  Marijuana.   Mild hallucinogenic drug derived from the hemp plant, often smoked in ciga- rettes called reefers or joints.  Marital therapy.   See   Couples counseling .  Masked disorder.   “Masking” of underlying depression or other emotional disturbance by delinquent behavior or other patterns seem- ingly unrelated to the basic disturbance.  Masochism.   Sexual stimulation and gratification from experiencing pain or degradation in relat- ing to a lover.  Mass madness.   Historically, widespread occur- rence of group behavior disorders that were apparently cases of hysteria.  Masturbation.   Self-stimulation of genitals for sexual gratification.  Maternal deprivation.   Lack of adequate care and stimulation by the mother or mother surrogate.  Maturation.   Process of development and body change resulting from heredity rather than learning.  Medical model.   View of disordered behavior as a symptom of a disease process rather than as a pattern representing faulty learning or cognition.  Melancholic type.   Subtype of major depres- sion that involves loss of interest or pleasure in nearly all activities and other symptoms, including early morning awakenings, worse depression in the morning, psychomotor agita- tion or retardation, loss of appetite or weight, excessive guilt, and sadness qualitatively differ- ent from that usually experienced after a loss.  Meninges.   Membranes that envelop the brain and spinal cord.  Mental age (MA).   Scale unit indicating level of intelligence in relation to chronological age.  Mental disorder.   Entire range of abnormal behavior patterns.  Mental hygiene movement.   Movement that advocated a method of treatment focused almost exclusively on the physical well-being of hospitalized mental patients.  Mental illness.   Serious mental disorder.  Mental retardation.   Significantly subaver- age general intellectual functioning that is accompanied by significant limitations in adaptive functioning and is obvious during the developmental period.  Mescaline.   Hallucinogenic drug derived from the peyote cactus.  Mesmerism.   Theory of “animal magnetism” (hypnosis) formulated by Anton Mesmer.  Mesocorticolimbic dopamine pathway (MCLP).   Center of psychoactive drug activa- tion in the brain. This area is involved in the release of dopamine and in mediating the rewarding properties of drugs.  Meta-analysis.   A statistical method used to combine the results of a number of similar research studies. The data from each study are transformed into a common metric called the  effect size . This allows the data from the vari- ous studies to be combined and then analyzed. You can think of a meta-analysis as being like research that you are already familiar with, except that the “participants” are individual research studies, not individual people.  Methadone.   Synthetic narcotic related to heroin; used in the treatment of heroin addic- tion because it satisfies the craving for heroin without producing serious psychological impairment.  Microcephaly.   Type of mental retardation resulting from impaired development of the brain and a consequent failure of the cranium to attain normal size.  Migraine.   Intensely painful, recurrent headache that typically involves only one side of the head and may be accompanied by nausea and other disturbances.  Mild (disorder).   Disorder low in severity.  Mild Neurocognitive Disorder.   A new   DSM-5  diagnosis that is characterized by a modest decline in cognitive functioning that does not interfere with the person’s ability to perform the routine tasks.  Milieu.   Immediate environment, physical or social or both.  Milieu therapy.   General approach to treatment for hospitalized patients that focuses on mak- ing the hospital environment itself a therapeu- tic community.  Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI/MMPI-2).   Widely used and empirically validated personality scales.  Minor tranquilizers.   Antianxiety drugs, such as the benzodiazepines.  Mixed episode.   A condition in which a person is characterized by symptoms of both full- blown manic and major depressive episodes for at least 1 week, whether the symptoms are intermixed or alternate rapidly every few days.  Model.   Analogy that helps a scientist order findings and see important relationships among them.
620   GLOSSARY  Modeling.   Learning of skills by imitating another person who performs the behavior to be acquired.  Moderate (disorder).   Disorder intermediate in severity.  Monoamine-oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).   Class of antidepressant drugs sometimes used for treating depression.  Monozygotic twins.   Identical twins, developed from one fertilized egg.  Mood congruent.   Delusions or hallucinations that are consistent with a person’s mood.  Mood disorders.   Disturbances of mood that are intense and persistent enough to be clearly maladaptive.  Mood incongruent.   Delusional thinking that is inconsistent with a person’s predominant mood.  Moral management.   Wide-ranging method of treatment that focuses on a patient’s social, individual, and occupational needs.  Moral therapy.   Therapy based on provision of kindness, understanding, and favorable envi- ronment; prevalent during early part of the nineteenth century.  Morbid.   Unhealthful, pathological.  Morphine.   Addictive drug derived from opium that can serve as a powerful sedative and pain reliever.  Motivation.   Often used as a synonym for  drive   or   activation ; implies that an organism’s actions are partly determined in direction and strength by its own inner nature.  Motivational interviewing.   A brief form of ther- apy, often used in areas of substance abuse and addiction, that allows clients to explore their desires, reasons, ability, and need for change.  Motive.   Internal condition that directs action toward some goal; the term is generally used to include both the drive and the goal to which it is directed.  Multi-infarct dementia.   See   Vascular dementia .  Multiple personality disorder.   See   Dissociative identity disorder .  Mutant gene.   Gene that has undergone some change in structure.  Mutation.   Change in the composition of a gene, usually causing harmful or abnormal charac- teristics to appear in the offspring.  Mutism.   Refusal or inability to speak.  N  Nancy School.   Group of physicians in nine- teenth-century Europe who accepted the view that hysteria was a sort of self-hypnosis.  Narcissism.   Self-love.  Narcissistic personality disorder.   Exaggerated sense of self-importance, preoccupation with being admired, and lack of empathy for the feelings of others.  Narcolepsy.   Disorder characterized by transient, compulsive states of sleepiness.  Narcotic drugs.   Drugs, such as morphine, that lead to physiological dependence and increased tolerance.  Natural killer cell.   White blood cell that destroys antigens by chemical dissolution.  Necessary cause.   A condition that must exist for a disorder to occur.  Need.   Biological or psychological condition whose gratification is necessary for the mainte- nance of homeostasis or for self-actualization.  Negative affect.   The experience of an emo- tional state characterized by negative emotions. Such negative emotions might include anger, anxiety, irritability, and sadness.  Negative automatic thoughts.   Thoughts that are just below the surface of awareness and that involve unpleasant pessimistic predictions.  Negative cognitive triad.   Negative thoughts about the self, the world, and the future.  Negative correlation.   A relationship between two variables such that a high score on one variable is associated with a low score on another variable.  Negative symptoms.   Symptoms that reflect an absence or deficit in normal functions (e.g., blunted affect, social withdrawal).  Negative-symptom schizophre- nia.   Schizophrenia characterized by an absence or deficit of normal behaviors, such as emotional expressiveness, communicative speech, and reactivity to environmental events.  Negativism.   Form of aggressive withdrawal that involves refusing to cooperate or obey com- mands, or doing the exact opposite of what has been requested.  Neologisms.   New words; a feature of language disturbance in schizophrenia.  Neonate.   Newborn infant.  Neoplasm.   Tumor.  Nervous breakdown.   General term used to refer broadly to lowered integration and inability to deal adequately with one’s life situation.  Neurodevelopmental disorders.   A group of dis- orders in   DSM-5   that are typically manifested in early childhood.  Neurofibrillary tangles.   Twisted and web-like nerve filaments that characterize the brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease.  Neurological examination.   Examination to determine the presence and extent of organic damage to the nervous system.  Neurology.   Field concerned with the study of the brain and nervous system and disorders thereof.  Neuron.   Individual nerve cell.  Neurophysiology.   Branch of biology concerned with the functioning of nervous tissue and the nervous system.  Neuropsychological assessment.   Use of psycho- logical tests that measure a person’s cognitive, perceptual, and motor performance to obtain clues to the extent and locus of brain damage.  Neuropsychological disorders.   Disorders that occur when there has been significant organic impairment or damage to a normal adolescent or adult brain.  Neuropsychological mood syndromes.   Serious mood disturbances apparently caused by dis- ruptions in the normal physiology of cerebral function.  Neuropsychological personality syndromes.  Changes in an individual’s general personality style or traits following brain injury of one or another type.  Neurosis.   Term historically used to characterize maladaptive behavior resulting from intrapsy- chic conflict and marked by prominent use of defense mechanisms.  Neurosurgery.   Surgery on the nervous system, especially the brain.  Neurosyphilis.   Syphilis affecting the central nervous system.  Neurotic behavior.   Anxiety-driven, exagger- ated use of avoidance behaviors and defense mechanisms.  Neurotic disorders.   Psychodynamic term for anxiety-driven mental health conditions that are manifest through avoidance patterns and defensive reactions.  Neuroticism.   Personality pattern including the tendency to experience anxiety, anger, hostil- ity, depression, self-consciousness, impulsive- ness, and vulnerability.  Neurotransmitters.   Chemical substances that are released into a synapse by the presynaptic neuron and that transmit nerve impulses from one neuron to another.  NGRI plea.   The not guilty by reason of insanity plea, or NGRI, is a legal defense a defendant might use to claim that he or she was not guilty of a crime because of insanity.  Nicotine.   Addictive alkaloid that is the chief active ingredient in tobacco and a drug of dependence.  Night hospital.   Mental hospital in which an individual may receive treatment during all or part of the night while carrying on his or her usual occupation in the daytime.  Nihilistic delusion.   Fixed belief that everything is unreal.  Nomenclature.   A formalized naming system.  Nondirective therapy.   Approach to psycho- therapy in which a therapist refrains from giving advice or directing the therapy. See also  Client-centered psychotherapy .  Norepinephrine.   Catecholamine neurotransmit- ter substance.  Norm.   Standard based on the measurement of a large group of people; used for comparing the scores of an individual with those of others in a defined group.  Normal.   Conforming to the usual or norm; healthy.
GLOSSARY   621  Normal distribution.   Tendency for most mem- bers of a population to cluster around a cen- tral point or average with respect to a given trait, with the rest spreading out to the two extremes in decreasing frequency.  NREM sleep.   Stages of sleep not characterized by the rapid eye movements that accompany dreaming.  O  Obesity.   The condition of having elevated fat masses in the body. Obesity is defined as hav- ing a body mass index (BMI) of 30 or higher.  Objective personality tests.   Structured tests, such as questionnaires, self-inventories, or rat- ing scales, used in psychological assessment.  Object-relations theory.   In psychoanalytic theory, this viewpoint focuses on an infant or young child’s interactions with “objects” (i.e., real or imagined people), as well as how they make symbolic representations of important people in their lives.  Observational learning.   Learning through observation alone without directly experienc- ing an unconditioned stimulus (for classical conditioning) or a reinforcement (for instru- mental conditioning).  Observational method.   Systematic technique by which observers are trained to watch and record behavior without bias.  Observational research.   In contrast to experi- mental research (which involves manipulating variables in some way and seeing what hap- pens), in observational research the researcher simply observes or assesses the characteristics of different groups, learning about them with- out manipulating the conditions to which they are exposed. Sometimes called   correlational research,   although the former is the preferred term.  Obsessions.   Persistent and recurrent intrusive thoughts, images, or impulses that a person experiences as disturbing and inappropriate but has difficulty suppressing.  Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).   Anxiety disorder characterized by the persistent intru- sion of unwanted and intrusive thoughts or distressing images; these are usually accom- panied by compulsive behaviors designed to neutralize the obsessive thoughts or images or to prevent some dreaded event or situation.  Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder (OCPD).   Perfectionism and excessive concern with maintaining order, control, and adher- ence to rules.  Occipital lobe.   Portion of cerebrum concerned chiefly with visual function.  Oedipus complex.   Desire for sexual relations with a parent of opposite sex; specifically, the desire of a boy for his mother, with his father a hated rival.  Olfactory hallucinations.   Hallucinations involv- ing the sense of smell.  Operant (or instrumental) conditioning.   Form of learning in which if a particular response is reinforced, it becomes more likely to be repeated on similar occasions.  Operational definition.   Definition of a concept on the basis of a set of operations that can be observed and measured.  Opium.   Narcotic drug that leads to physiologi- cal dependence and the development of toler- ance; derivatives are morphine, heroin, and codeine.  Oppositional defiant disorder (ODD).  Childhood disorder that appears by age 6 and is characterized by persistent acts of aggressive or antisocial behavior that may or may not be against the law.  Oral stage.   First stage of psychosexual develop- ment in Freudian theory, in which mouth or oral activities are the primary source of pleasure.  Organic mental disorders.   Outdated term used to refer to disorders that resulted from some identifiable brain pathology.  Organic viewpoint.   Concept that all mental disorders have an organic basis. See also  Biological viewpoint .  Orgasm.   Third phase of the human sexual response, during which there is a release of sexual tension and a peaking of sexual pleasure.  Outcome research.   Studies of effectiveness of treatment.  Outpatient.   Ambulatory client who visits a hos- pital or clinic for examination and treatment, as distinct from a hospitalized client.  Ovaries.   Female gonads.  Overanxious disorder.   Disorder of childhood characterized by excessive worry and persistent fears unrelated to any specific event; often includes somatic and sleeping problems.  Overcompensation.   Type of ego-defense mech- anism in which an undesirable trait is covered up by exaggerating a desirable trait.  Overloading.   Subjecting an organism to exces- sive stress, for example, forcing the organism to handle or “process” an excessive amount of information.  Overprotection.   Shielding a child to the extent that he or she becomes too dependent on the parent.  Overt behavior.   Activities that can be observed by an outsider.  Ovum.   Female gamete or germ cell.  P  Pain disorder.   Experience of pain of sufficient duration and severity to cause significant life disruption in the absence of medical pathology that would explain it.  Panic.   A basic emotion that involves activa- tion of the “fight-or-flight” response of the sympathetic nervous system and that is often characterized by an overwhelming sense of fear or terror.  Panic attack.   A severe, intense fear response that appears to come out of the blue; it has many physical and cognitive symptoms such as fear of dying or losing control.  Panic disorder.   Occurrence of repeated unex- pected panic attacks, often accompanied by intense anxiety about having another one.  Panic provocation procedures.   A variety of biological challenge procedures that provoke panic attacks at higher rates in people with panic disorder than in people without panic disorder.  Paradigm.   Model or pattern; in research, a basic design specifying concepts considered legiti- mate and procedures to be used in the collec- tion and interpretation of data.  Paranoia.   Symptoms of delusions and impaired contact with reality without the bizarreness, fragmentation, and severe personality disorga- nization characteristic of schizophrenia.  Paranoid personality disorder.   Pervasive suspi- ciousness and distrust of others.  Paranoid schizophrenia.   See   Schizophrenia, paranoid type .  Paraphilias.   Persistent sexual behavior patterns in which unusual objects, rituals, or situations are required for full sexual satisfaction.  Paraprofessional.   Person who has been trained in mental health services but not at the profes- sional level.  Parasympathetic nervous system.   Division of the autonomic nervous system that controls most of the basic metabolic functions essential for life.  Paresis.   See   General paresis .  Paresthesia.   Exceptional sensations, such as tingling.  Parkinson’s disease.   A neurodegenerative dis- ease characterized by motor problems (rigidity, tremors) and caused by destruction of dopa- mine neurons in the brain.  Passive-aggressive personality disorder.  Provisional category of personality disorder in   DSM-IV-TR   characterized by a pattern of passive resistance to demands in social or work situations, which may take such forms as simple resistance to performing routine tasks, being sullen or argumentative, or alternating between defiance and submission.  Pathogenic.   Pertaining to conditions that lead to pathology.  Pathological gambling.   Progressive disorder characterized by loss of control over gambling, preoccupation with gambling and obtaining money for gambling, and irrational gambling behavior in spite of adverse consequences.
622   GLOSSARY  Pathology.   Abnormal physical or mental condition.  PCP.   Phencyclidine; developed as a tranquilizer but not marketed because of its unpredictabil- ity. Known on the street as “angel dust,” this drug produces stupor and, at times, prolonged coma or psychosis.  Pedigree (family history) method.   Observation of samples of relatives of each subject or each carrier of the trait or disorder in question.  Pedophilic disorder.   A paraphilia in which an adult’s preferred or exclusive sexual partner is a prepubertal child.  Pemoline.   Drug, similar to Ritalin, used to treat ADHD   Perception.   Interpretation of sensory input.  Perceptual filtering.   Processes involved in selec- tive attention to aspects of the great mass of incoming stimuli that continually impinge on an organism.  Perfectionism.   The need to get things exactly right. A personality trait that may increase risk for the development of eating disorders, perhaps because perfectionistic people may be more likely to idealize thinness.  Performance test.   Test in which percep- tual-motor rather than verbal content is emphasized.  Peripheral nervous system.   Nerve fibers passing between the central nervous system and the sense organs, muscles, and glands.  Perseveration.   Persistent continuation of a line of thought or activity once it is under way. Clinically inappropriate repetition.  Persistent depressive disorder.   A new   DSM-5  disorder that involves long-standing depressed mood (2 years or more). The disorder incor- porates dysthymic disorder and chronic major depression from   DSM-IV .  Personality.   Unique pattern of traits that char- acterize an individual.  Personality disorder.   Gradual development of inflexible and distorted personality and behav- ioral patterns that result in persistently mal- adaptive ways of perceiving, thinking about, and relating to the world.  Personality or psychological decompensation.  Inability to adapt to sustained or severe stressors.  Personality profile.   Graphical summary that is derived from several tests or subtests of the same test battery or scale and that shows the personality configuration of an individual or group of individuals.  Personality test.   See   Objective personality tests   and   Projective personality tests .  Person-centered therapy.   See   Client-centered therapy .  Pervasive developmental disorders (PDDs).  Severely disabling conditions marked by deficits in language, perceptual, and motor development; defective reality testing; and inability to function in social situations.  Pessimistic attributional style.   Cognitive style involving a tendency to make internal, stable, and global attributions for negative life events.  PET scan.   See   Positron emission tomography .  Phagocyte.   Circulating white blood cell that binds to antigens and partially destroys them by engulfment.  Phallic stage.   In psychoanalytic theory, the stage of psychosexual development during which genital exploration and manipulation occur.  Pharmacology.   The science of drugs.  Pharmacotherapy.   Treatment by means of drugs.  Phenomenological.   Pertaining to the immediate perceiving and experiencing of an individual.  Phenotype.   The observed structural and func- tional characteristics of a person that result from interaction between the genotype and the environment.  Phenylketonuria (PKU).   Type of mental retar- dation resulting from a baby’s lack of a liver enzyme needed to break down phenylalanine, an amino acid found in many foods.  Phobia.   Persistent and disproportionate fear of some specific object or situation that presents little or no actual danger.  Physiological dependence.   Type of drug depen- dence involving withdrawal symptoms when drug is discontinued.  Pick’s disease.   Form of presenile dementia.  Pineal gland.   Small gland at the base of the brain that helps regulate the body’s biological clock and may also establish pace of sexual development.  Pituitary gland.   Endocrine gland associated with many regulatory functions.  Placebo effect.   Positive effect experienced after an inactive treatment is administered in such a way that a person thinks he or she is receiving an active treatment.  Placebo treatment.   An inert pill or otherwise neutral intervention that produces desirable therapeutic effects because of the subject’s expectations that it will be beneficial.  Plaques.   Abnormal accumulations of pro- tein found in the brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease.  Play therapy.   Use of play activities in psycho- therapy with children.  Pleasure principle.   Demand that an instinctual need be immediately gratified regardless of reality or moral considerations.  Point prevalence.   The number of cases of a spe- cific condition or disorder that can be found in a population at one given point in time.  Polygenic.   Caused by the action of many genes together in an additive or interactive fashion.  Poor premorbid schizophrenia.   See   Process schizophrenia .  Positive correlation.   A relationship between two variables such that a high score on one vari- able is associated with a high score on another variable.  Positive psychology.   A new field that focuses on human traits (e.g., optimism) and resources that are potentially important for health and well-being.  Positive reinforcer.   Reinforcer that increases the probability of recurrence of a given response.  Positive symptoms.   Symptoms that are charac- terized by something being added to normal behavior or experience. Includes delusions, hallucinations, motor agitation, and marked emotional turmoil.  Positive-symptom schizophrenia.   Schizophrenia characterized by something added to normal behavior and experience, such as marked emo- tional turmoil, motor agitation, delusions, and hallucinations.  Positron emission tomography (PET) scan.   Scanning technique that measures metabolic processes to appraise how well an organ is functioning.  Posthypnotic amnesia.   Subject’s lack of mem- ory for the period during which he or she was hypnotized.  Posthypnotic suggestion.   Suggestion given during hypnosis to be carried out by a subject after he or she is brought out of hypnosis.  Postpartum depression.   Depression occurring after childbirth. Most commonly it is mild and transient (postpartum blues) but can become a major depressive episode.  Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).   Disorder that occurs following an extreme traumatic event, in which a person reexperiences the event, avoids reminders of the trauma, and exhibits persistent increased arousal.  Posttraumatic theory (of DID).   The view that DID starts from the child’s attempt to cope with an overwhelming sense of hopelessness and powerlessness in the face of repeated trau- matic abuse.  Predisposition.   Tendency to develop certain symptoms under given stress conditions.  Prefrontal lobotomy.   Surgical procedure used before the advent of antipsychotic drugs, in which the frontal lobes of the brain were sev- ered from the deeper centers underlying them, resulting in permanent structural changes in the brain.  Prejudice.   Emotionally toned conception favor- able or unfavorable to some person, group, or idea—typically in the absence of sound evidence.  Premature ejaculation.   Persistent and recurrent onset of orgasm and ejaculation with minimal sexual stimulation.  Prematurity.   Birth of an infant before the end of a normal period of pregnancy.
GLOSSARY   623  Premorbid.   Existing before the onset of mental disorder.  Prenatal.   Before birth.  Prepared learning.   The view that people are biologically prepared through evolution to more readily acquire fears of certain objects or situations that may once have posed a threat to our early ancestors. For example, people more readily develop fears of snakes and spiders if they are paired with aversive events, than they develop fears of knives or guns.  Presenile dementia.   Mental disorders resulting from brain degeneration before old age.  Presenting problem.   Major symptoms and behavior the client is experiencing.  Prevalence.   In a population, the proportion of active cases of a disorder that can be identi- fied at a given point in time or during a given period.  Primary gain.   In psychodynamic theory it is the goal achieved by symptoms of conversion dis- order by keeping internal intrapsychic conflicts out of awareness. In contemporary terms it is the goal achieved by symptoms of conversion disorder by allowing the person to escape or avoid stressful situations.  Primary prevention.   Older term for preven- tive efforts aimed at reducing the incidence of a disease or disorder and fostering positive health. See   Universal prevention .  Primary process thinking.   Gratification of id demands by means of imagery or fantasy without the ability to undertake the realis- tic actions needed to meet those instinctual demands.  Proband.   In a genetic study, the original indi- vidual who evidences the trait in which the investigator is interested. Same as   index case.  Problem checklist.   Inventory used in behavioral assessment to determine an individual’s fears, moods, and other problems.  Problem drinker.   Behavioral term referring to one who has serious problems associated with drinking.  Process schizophrenia.   Schizophrenic pattern— marked by seclusiveness, gradual waning of interest in the surrounding world, diminished emotional responsivity, and mildly inappropri- ate responses—that develops gradually and tends to be long lasting; alternatively known as   poor premorbid schizophrenia   and   chronic schizophrenia.  Prodromal.   Considered to be an early (sub- clinical) stage of schizophrenia, characterized by very low-level symptoms or behavioral idiosyncrasies.  Prognosis.   Prediction of the probable course and outcome of a disorder.  Projection.   Ego-defense mechanism of attribut- ing one’s own unacceptable motives or charac- teristics to others.  Projective personality tests.   Techniques that use various ambiguous stimuli that a subject is encouraged to interpret and from which the subject’s personality characteristics can be analyzed.  Prolonged exposure.   A behaviorally oriented treatment strategy in which the patient is asked to vividly recount the traumatic event over and over until there is a decrease in their emotional responses.  Prospective research.   Method that often focuses on individuals who have a higher-than- average likelihood of becoming psychologi- cally disordered before abnormal behavior is observed.  Protective factors.   Influences that modify a person’s response to an environmental stressor, making it less likely that the person will expe- rience the adverse effects of the stressor.  Prototypal approach.   Approach to classifying abnormal behavior that assumes the existence of prototypes of behavior disorders that, rather than being mutually exclusive, may blend into others with which they share many characteristics.  Psilocybin.   Hallucinogenic drug derived from a variety of mushrooms.  Psychedelic drugs.   Drugs such as LSD that often produce hallucinations.  Psychiatric nursing.   Field of nursing primarily concerned with mental disorders.  Psychiatric social worker.   Professional who has had graduate training in social work with psychiatric specialization, typically leading to a master’s degree.  Psychiatrist.   Medical doctor who specializes in the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders.  Psychiatry.   Field of medicine concerned with understanding, assessing, treating, and pre- venting mental disorders.  Psychic trauma.   Any aversive experience that inflicts serious psychological damage on a person.  Psychoactive substance.   Drug that affects men- tal functioning.  Psychoactive substance abuse.   Pathological use of a substance resulting in potentially hazard- ous behavior or in continued use despite a persistent social, psychological, occupational, or health problem.  Psychoactive substance dependence.   Use of a psychoactive substance to the point where one has a marked physiological need for increas- ing amounts of the substance to achieve the desired effects.  Psychoanalysis.   Methods Freud used to study and treat patients.  Psychoanalytic perspective.   Theory of psycho- pathology, initially developed by Freud, that emphasizes the inner dynamics of unconscious motives.  Psychodrama.   Psychotherapeutic technique in which the acting of various roles is an essential part.  Psychodynamic perspectives.   Theories of psy- chopathology based on modification and revi- sion of Freud’s theories.  Psychodynamic therapy.   Psychological treat- ment that focuses on individual personality dynamics, usually from a psychodynamic or psychodynamically derived perspective.  Psychogenic.   Of psychological origin: originat- ing in the psychological functioning of an individual.  Psychogenic amnesia.   Amnesia of psychological origin, common in initial reactions to trau- matic experiences.  Psychogenic illness.   Psychologically induced or maintained disease.  Psychohistory.   A field of study analyzing history according to psychoanalytic principles.  Psychological assessment.   The use of psycho- logical procedures such as behavioral observa- tions, interview, and psychological tests to obtain a picture of a client’s mental health symptoms and personality.  Psychological autopsy.   Analytical procedure used to determine whether or not death was self-inflicted and, if so, why.  Psychological need.   Need emerging out of environmental interactions, for example, the need for social approval.  Psychological screening.   Use of psychological procedures or tests to detect psychological problems among applicants in preemployment evaluations.  Psychological test.   Standardized procedure designed to measure a subject’s performance on a specified task.  Psychomotor.   Involving both psychological and physical activity.  Psychomotor retardation.   Slowing down of psychological and motor functions.  Psychoneuroimmunology.   Study of the interac- tions between the immune system and the ner- vous system and the influence of these factors on behavior.  Psychopathology.   Abnormal behavior.  Psychopathy.   A condition involving the features of antisocial personality disorder and such traits as lack of empathy, inflated and arrogant self-appraisal, and glib and superficial charm.  Psychopharmacology.   Science of determining which drugs alleviate which disorders and why they do so.  Psychophysiological (psychosomatic) disor- ders.   Physical disorders in which psychologi- cal factors are believed to play a major causal role.  Psychophysiological variables.   Measures of bio- logical functioning including heart rate, blood pressure, EEG, and so on.
624   GLOSSARY  Psychosexual development.   Freudian view of development as involving a succession of stages, each characterized by a dominant mode of achieving libidinal pleasure.  Psychosexual stages of develop- ment.   According to Freudian theory, there are five stages of psychosexual development, each characterized by a dominant mode of achieving sexual pleasure: the oral stage, the anal stage, the phallic stage, the latency stage, and the genital stage.  Psychosis.   Severe impairment in the ability to tell what is real and what is not real.  Psychosocial deprivation.   Lack of needed stim- ulation and interaction during early life.  Psychosocial viewpoints.   Approaches to under- standing mental disorders that emphasize the importance of early experience and an aware- ness of social influences and psychological processes within an individual.  Psychosurgery.   Brain surgery used in the past with excessive frequency in the treatment of functional mental disorders.  Psychotherapy.   Treatment of mental disorders by psychological methods.  Psychotropic drugs.   Drugs whose main effects are mental or behavioral in nature.  Purge.   Purging refers to the removal of food from the body by such means as self-induced vomiting or misuse of laxatives, diuretics, and enemas.  Q  Q-sort.   Personality measure in which a subject, or a clinician, sorts a number of statements into piles according to their applicability to the subject.  R  Racism.   Prejudice and discrimination directed toward individuals or groups because of their racial background.  Random assignment.   A procedure used to cre- ate equivalent groups in which every research participant has an equal chance of being assigned to any group in the study.  Random sample.   Sample drawn in such a way that each member of a population has an equal chance of being selected; it is hoped that such a sample will be fully representative of the population from which it is drawn.  Randomized clinical trials (RCTs).   A clinical trial in which participants are randomly assigned to different treatments.  Randomized controlled trials.   A randomized controlled trial involves a specific treatment group (the group the researchers are most interested in) as well as a control treatment group (against which the treatment group will be compared). Participants have an equal chance of being placed in either group because placement is determined randomly.  Rape.   Sexual activity that occurs under actual or threatened forcible coercion of one person by another.  Rapid cycling.   A pattern of bipolar disorder involving at least four manic or depressive epi- sodes per year.  Rapport.   Interpersonal relationship character- ized by a spirit of cooperation, confidence, and harmony.  Rating scales.   Formal structure for organizing information obtained from clinical observation and self-reports to encourage reliability and objectivity.  Rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT).  Form of psychotherapy focusing on changing a client’s maladaptive thought processes, on which maladaptive emotional responses and thus behavior are presumed to depend.  Rationalization.   Ego-defense mechanism that involves the use of contrived “explanations” to conceal or disguise unworthy motives for a person’s behavior.  Reaction formation.   Ego-defense mechanism that prevents the awareness or expression of unacceptable desires via the exaggerated adop- tion of seemingly opposite behavior.  Reactive schizophrenia.   Schizophrenia pat- tern—marked by confusion and intense emotional turmoil—that normally develops suddenly and has identifiable precipitating stressors; alternatively known   as good premor- bid schizophrenia ,   Type I schizophrenia , and  acute schizophrenia .  Reality principle.   Awareness of the demands of the environment and adjustment of behavior to meet these demands.  Reality testing.   Behavior aimed at testing or exploring the nature of a person’s social and physical environment; often used more specifi- cally to refer to testing the limits of the per- missiveness of the social environment.  Recessive gene.   Gene that is effective only when paired with an identical gene.  Recidivism.   Shift back to one’s original behavior (often delinquent or criminal) after a period of treatment or rehabilitation.  Recompensation.   Increase in integra- tion or inner organization. Opposite of  decompensation.  Recurrence.   A new occurrence of a disorder after a remission of symptom.  Recurrent.   Term used to describe a disorder pattern that tends to come and go.  Recurrent major depressive episode with a sea- sonal pattern.   A form of major depression where the episodes of depression recur on a regular seasonal basis (fall/winter), but not at other times of the year.  Referral.   Sending or recommending an indi- vidual or family for psychological assessment or treatment.  Regression.   Ego-defense mechanism of retreat to an earlier developmental level involving less mature behavior and responsibility.  Rehabilitation.   Use of reeducation rather than punishment to overcome behavioral deficits.  Reinforcement.   The process of rewarding desired responses.  Relapse.   Return of the symptoms of a disorder after a fairly short period of time.  Reliability.   Degree to which a measuring device produces the same result each time it is used to measure the same thing or when two or more different raters use it.  REM sleep.   Stage of sleep involving rapid eye movements (REM); associated with dreaming.  Remission.   Marked improvement or recovery appearing in the course of a mental illness; may or may not be permanent.  Representative sample.   Small group selected in such a way as to be representative of the larger group from which it is drawn.  Repression.   Ego-defense mechanism that pre- vents painful or dangerous thoughts from entering consciousness.  Residential treatment.   Out-of-home placements for children and adolescents with mental health problems.  Residual schizophrenia.   See   Schizophrenia, residual type .  Resilience.   The ability to adapt successfully to even very difficult circumstances.  Resistance.   Selye’s second stage of responding to continuing trauma, involving finding some means to deal with the trauma and adjust to it. In psychodynamic treatment, the person’s unwillingness or inability to talk about certain thoughts, motives, or experiences.  Resistance to extinction.   Tendency of a con- ditioned response to persist despite lack of reinforcement.  Resolution.   Final phase of the human sexual response, during which a person has a sense of relaxation and well-being.  Response shaping.   Positive reinforcement tech- nique used in therapy to establish, by gradual approximation, a response not initially in a person’s behavioral repertoire.  Reticular activating system (RAS).   Fibers going from the reticular formation to higher brain centers and presumably functioning as a gen- eral arousal system.  Reticular formation.   Neural nuclei and fibers in the brain stem that apparently play an impor- tant role in arousing and alerting an organism and in controlling attention.  Retrograde amnesia.   Loss of memory for events that occurred during a circumscribed period prior to brain injury or damage.  Retrospective research.   Research approach that attempts to retrace earlier events in the life of a subject.
GLOSSARY   625  Retrospective strategy.   Method of trying to uncover the probable causes of abnormal behavior by looking backward from the present.  Rigidity.   Tendency to follow established cop- ing patterns, with failure to see alternatives or extreme difficulty in changing one’s estab- lished patterns.  Ritalin.   Central nervous system stimulant often used to treat ADHD.  Role-playing.   Form of assessment in which a person is instructed to play a part, enabling a clinician to observe a client’s behavior directly.  Rorschach Inkblot Test.   Use of 10 inkblot pictures to which a subject responds with asso- ciations that come to mind. Analysis of these responses enables a clinician to infer personal- ity characteristics.  Rumination.   Refers to the process of going over and over in one’s mind or going over a thought repeatedly time and again.  S  Sadism.   Achievement of sexual gratification by inflicting physical or psychic pain or humilia- tion on a sexual partner.  Saint Vitus’s dance.   Name given to the dancing mania (and mass hysteria) that spread from Italy to Germany and the rest of Europe in the Middle Ages.  Sample.   Group on which measurements are taken; should normally be representative of the population about which an inference is to be made.  Sampling.   The process of selecting a representa- tive subgroup from a defined population of interest.  Scapegoating.   Displacement of aggression onto some object, person, or group other than the source of frustration.  Schedule of reinforcement.   Program of rewards for requisite behavior.  Schema.   An underlying representation of knowledge that guides current processing of information and often leads to distortions in attention, memory, and comprehension.  Schizoaffective disorder.   Form of psychotic dis- order in which the symptoms of schizophrenia co-occur with symptoms of a mood disorder.  Schizoid personality disorder.   Inability to form social relationships or express feelings and lack of interest in doing so.  Schizophrenia.   Disorder characterized by hal- lucinations, delusions, disorganized speech and behavior, as well as problems in self-care and general functioning.  Schizophrenia, catatonic type.   Type of schizo- phrenia in which the central feature is pro- nounced motor symptoms, of either an excited or a stuporous type, which sometimes make for difficulty in differentiating this condition from a psychotic mood disorder.  Schizophrenia, disorganized type.   Type of schizophrenia that usually begins at an earlier age and represents a more severe disintegration of the personality than in the other types of schizophrenia.  Schizophrenia, paranoid type.   Type of schizo- phrenia in which a person is increasingly sus- picious, has severe difficulties in interpersonal relationships, and experiences absurd, illogical, and often changing delusions.  Schizophrenia, residual type.   Diagnostic cat- egory used for people who have experienced a schizophrenic episode from which they have recovered enough to not show prominent symptoms but are still manifesting some mild signs of their past disorder.  Schizophrenia, undifferentiated type.   Type of schizophrenia in which a person meets the usual criteria for being schizophrenic—includ- ing (in varying combinations) delusions, hallucinations, thought disorder, and bizarre behavior—but does not clearly fit into one of the other types because of a mixed symptom picture.  Schizophreniform disorder.   Category of schizo- phrenic-like psychosis less than 6 months in duration.  Schizophrenogenic.   Schizophrenia-causing.  Schizotypal personality disorder.   Excessive introversion, pervasive social interpersonal def- icits, cognitive and perceptual distortions, and eccentricities in communication and behavior.  Seasonal affective disorder.   Mood disorder involving at least two episodes of depression in the past 2 years occurring at the same time of year (most commonly fall or winter), with remission also occurring at the same time of year (most commonly spring).  Secondary gain.   External circumstances that tend to reinforce the maintenance of disability.  Secondary prevention.   Older term for pre- vention techniques that typically involve emergency or crisis intervention, with efforts focused on reducing the impact, dura- tion, or spread of a problem. See   Selective intervention .  Secondary process thinking.   Reality-oriented rational processes of the ego for dealing with the external world and the exercise of control over id demands.  Secondary reinforcer.   Reinforcement provided by a stimulus that has gained reward value by being associated with a primary reinforcing stimulus.  Sedative.   Drug used to reduce tension and induce relaxation and sleep.  Selective intervention.   Mobilization of preven- tion resources to eliminate or reduce a particu- lar type of problem (such as teenage pregnancy or alcohol or drug abuse).  Selective mutism.   Condition that involves the persistent failure to speak in specific social situations and interferes with educational or social adjustment.  Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).   A medication that inhibits serotonin that is used in the treatment of depression.  Self (ego).   Integrating core of a personality that mediates between needs and reality.  Self-acceptance.   Being satisfied with one’s attri- butes and qualities while remaining aware of one’s limitations.  Self-actualizing.   Achieving one’s full potentiali- ties as a human being.  Self-concept.   A person’s sense of his or her own identity, worth, capabilities, and limitations.  Self-esteem.   Feeling of personal worth.  Self-evaluation.   Way in which an individual views the self, in terms of worth, adequacy, etc.  Self-ideal (ego-ideal).   Person or “self” a person thinks he or she could and should be.  Self-identity.   Individual’s delineation and awareness of his or her continuing identity as a person.  Self-instructional training.   Cognitive-behavioral method aimed at teaching a person to alter his or her covert behavior.  Self-monitoring.   Observing and recording one’s own behavior, thoughts, and feelings as they occur in various natural settings.  Self-reinforcement.   Reward of self for desired or appropriate behavior.  Self-report data.   Data collected directly from participants, typically by means of interviews or questionnaires.  Self-report inventory.   Procedure in which a subject is asked to respond to statements in terms of their applicability to him or her.  Self-schema.   Our view of what we are, what we might become, and what is important to us.  Self-statements.   A person’s implicit verbaliza- tions of what he or she is experiencing.  Senile.   Pertaining to old age.  Senile dementia.   Mental disorders that some- times accompany brain degeneration in old age.  Sensate focus learning.   Learning to derive plea- sure from touching one’s partner and being touched by him or her; this training is used in sexual therapy to enhance sexual feelings and help overcome sexual dysfunction.  Sensory deprivation.   Restriction of sensory stimulation below the level required for nor- mal functioning of the central nervous system.  Sentence completion test.   Projective technique utilizing incomplete sentences that a person is to complete, analysis of which enables a clini- cian to infer personality dynamics.  Separation anxiety disorder.   Childhood disor- der characterized by unrealistic fears, oversen- sitivity, self-consciousness, nightmares, and chronic anxiety.
626   GLOSSARY  Separation-individuation.   According to Mahler, a developmental phase in which a child gains an internal representation of the self as distinct from representations of other objects.  Sequelae.   Symptoms remaining as the after- math of a disorder.  Serotonin.   A neurotransmitter from the indol- amine class that is synthesized from the amino acid tryptophan. Also referred to as 5-HT(5- hydroxytryptamine), this neurotransmitter is thought to be involved in a wide range of psychopathological conditions.  Set point.   The tendency of our bodies to resist efforts to bring about a marked change (increase or decrease) in weight.  Severe (disorder).   Disorder of a high degree of seriousness.  Severe major depressive episode with psychotic features.   Major depression involving loss of contact with reality, often in the form of delu- sions or hallucinations.  Sex chromosomes.   Pair of chromosomes inher- ited by an individual that determine sex and certain other characteristics.  Sexual abuse.   Sexual contact that involves physical or psychological coercion or occurs when at least one individual cannot reasonably consent to the contact.  Sexual aversion disorder.   Sexual dysfunction in which a person shows extreme aversion to, and avoidance of, all genital sexual contact with a partner.  Sexual dysfunction.   Impairment either in the desire for sexual gratification or in the ability to achieve it.  Shaping.   Form of instrumental conditioning; at first, all responses resembling the desired one are reinforced, then only the closest approxi- mations, until finally the desired response is attained.  Shared psychotic disorder.   Psychosis in which two or more people develop persistent, interlock- ing delusional ideas. Also known as   folie à deux.  Sheltered workshops.   Workshops where mentally retarded or otherwise handicapped persons can engage in constructive work in the community.  Short-term crisis therapy.   Brief treatment that focuses on the immediate problem an indi- vidual or family is experiencing.  Siblings.   Offspring of the same parents.  Sick role.   Protected role provided by society via the medical model for a person suffering from severe physical or mental disorder.  Significant others.   In interpersonal theory of psychological development, parents or others on whom an infant is dependent for meeting all physical and psychological needs.  Signs.   Objective observations that suggest to a diagnostician a patient’s physical or mental disorder.  Simple phobia.   See   Specific phobia .  Simple tension headaches.   Common headaches in which stress leads to contraction of the muscles surrounding the skull; these contrac- tions result in vascular constrictions that cause headache.  Single-case research design.   An experimental research design (e.g., an ABAB design) that involves only one subject.  Situational test.   Test that measures perfor- mance in a simulated life situation.  Sleepwalking disorder.   Disorder of childhood that involves repeated episodes of leaving the bed and walking around without being con- scious of the experience or remembering it later. Also known as   somnambulism.  Social exchange view.   Model of interpersonal relationships based on the premise that such relationships are formed for mutual gratifica- tion of needs.  Social introversion.   Trait characterized by shy, withdrawn, and inhibited behavior.  Social norms.   Group standards concerning which behaviors are viewed as acceptable and which as unacceptable.  Social pathology.   Abnormal patterns of social organization, attitudes, or behavior; undesir- able social conditions that tend to produce individual pathology.  Social phobia.   Fear of situations in which a per- son might be exposed to the scrutiny of others and fear of acting in a humiliating or embar- rassing way.  Social recovery.   Ability to manage indepen- dently as an economically effective and inter- personally connected member of society.  Social role.   Behavior expected of a person occu- pying a given position in a group.  “Social” self.   Façade a person displays to others, as contrasted with the private self.  Social work.   Applied offshoot of sociology con- cerned with analyzing social environments and providing services that enhance the adjustment of a client in both family and community settings.  Social worker.   Person in a mental health field with a master’s degree in social work (MSW) plus supervised training in clinical or social service agencies.  Socialization.   Process by which a child acquires the values and impulse controls deemed appro- priate by his or her culture.  Social-learning programs.   Behavioral programs using learning techniques, especially token economies, to help patients assume more responsibility for their own behavior.  Sociocognitive theory (of DID).   View that DID develops when a highly suggestible person learns to adopt and enact the roles of multiple identities, mostly because clinicians have inad- vertently suggested, legitimized, and reinforced them and because these different identities are geared to the individual’s own personal goals.  Sociocultural viewpoint.   Perspective that focuses on broad social conditions that influence the develop- ment or behavior of individuals and groups.  Socioeconomic status.   Position on social and economic scale in community; determined largely by income and occupational level.  Sociogenic.   Having its roots in sociocultural conditions.  Sociopathic personality.   See   Antisocial person- ality disorder .  Sodium pentothal.   Barbiturate drug sometimes used in psychotherapy to produce a state of relaxation and suggestibility.  Soma.   Greek word for body.  Somatic.   Pertaining to the body.  Somatic weakness.   Special vulnerability of given organ systems to stress.  Somatization disorder.   Multiple complaints, over a long period beginning before age 30, of physical ailments that are inadequately explained by independent findings of physical illness or injury and that lead to medical treat- ment or to significant life impairment.  Somatoform disorders.   Conditions involving physical complaints or disabilities that occur without any evidence of physical pathology to account for them.  Somnambulism.   See   Sleepwalking disorder .  Spasm.   Intense, involuntary, usually painful contraction of a muscle or group of muscles.  Spasticity.   Marked hypertonicity or continual overcontraction of muscles, causing stiffness, awkwardness, and motor incoordination.  Specific learning disorders.   Developmental dis- orders involving deficits in language, speech, mathematical, or motor skills.  Specific phobia.   Persistent or disproportionate fears of various objects, places, or situations, such as fears of situations (airplanes or eleva- tors), other species (snakes, spiders), or aspects of the environment (high places, water).  Specifiers (in mood disorders).   Different pat- terns of symptoms that sometimes characterize major depressive episodes which may help predict the course and preferred treatments for the condition.  Sperm.   Male gamete or germ cell.  Split-brain research.   Research associated with split- brain surgery, which cuts off the transmission of information from one cerebral hemisphere to the other by severing the corpus callosum.  Spontaneous recovery.   The return of a learned response at some time after extinction has occurred.  Stage of exhaustion.   Selye’s third and final stage in the general adaptation syndrome, in which an organism is no longer able to resist continuing stress; may result in death.  Stage of resistance.   Second stage of the general adaptation syndrome.  Standardization.   Procedure for establishing the expected performance range on a test.
GLOSSARY   627  Stanford-Binet.   Standardized intelligence test for children.  Startle reaction.   Sudden involuntary motor reaction to intense unexpected stimuli; may result from mild stimuli if a person is hypersensitive.  Statistical significance.   A measure of the prob- ability that a research finding could have occurred by chance alone.  Statutory rape.   Sexual intercourse with a minor.  Steady states (homeostasis).   Tendency of an organism to maintain conditions that make possible a constant level of physiological functioning.  Stereotyping.   The tendency to jump to conclu- sions (often negative) about what a person is like based on the beliefs about that group that exist (often incorrectly) in the culture (e.g., French people are rude, homosexuals have good taste in clothes, mental patients are dan- gerous, etc.).  Stereotypy.   Persistent and inappropriate repeti- tion of phrases, gestures, or acts.  Stigma.   Negative labeling.  Stimulants.   Drugs that tend to increase feelings of alertness, reduce feelings of fatigue, and enable a person to stay awake over sustained periods of time.  Stimulus generalization.   Spread of a conditioned response to some stimulus similar to, but not identical with, the conditioned stimulus.  Strattera.   A medication used in the treatment of ADHD.  Stress.   Effects created within an organism by the application of a stressor.  Stress tolerance.   A person’s ability to withstand stress without becoming seriously impaired.  Stress-inoculation therapy.   Type of self- instructional training focused on altering self- statements that a person routinely makes in stress-producing situations.  Stress-inoculation training.   Preventive strategy that prepares people to tolerate an anticipated threat by changing the things they say to themselves before the crisis.  Stressors.   Adjustive demands that require coping behavior on the part of an individual or group.  Stroke.   See   Cerebrovascular accident .  Structural family therapy.   Treatment of an entire family by analysis of interaction among family members.  Structured assessment interview.   Interview with set introduction and that follows a pre- determined set of procedures and questions throughout.  Stupor.   Condition of lethargy and unre- sponsiveness, with partial or complete unconsciousness.  Sublimation.   Ego-defense mechanism that chan- nels frustrated expression of sexual energy into substitutive activities.  Substance abuse.   Maladaptive pattern of sub- stance use manifested by recurrent and signifi- cant adverse consequences related to the use of the substance.  Substance dependence.   Severe form of sub- stance use disorder involving physiological dependence on the substance, tolerance, with- drawal, and compulsive drug taking.  Substance-related disorders.   Patterns of mal- adaptive behavior centered on the regular use of a substance, such as a drug or alcohol.  Substitution.   Acceptance of substitute goals or satisfactions in place of those originally sought or desired.  Successive approximation.   See   Shaping .  Sufficient cause.   A condition that guarantees the occurrence of a disorder.  Suicide.   Taking one’s own life.  Suicidology.   Study of the causes and prevention of suicide.  Superego.   Conscience; ethical or moral dimen- sions (attitudes) of personality.  Suppression.   Conscious forcing of desires or thoughts out of consciousness; conscious inhi- bition of desires or impulses.  Surrogate.   Substitute for another person, such as a parent or mate.  Symbol.   Image, word, object, or activity that is used to represent something else.  Symbolism.   Representation of one idea or object by another.  Sympathetic division.   Division of the auto- nomic nervous system that is active in emer- gency conditions of extreme cold, violent effort, and emotions.  Sympathetic-adrenomedullary (SAM) sys- tem.   System designed to mobilize resources and prepare for a fight-or-flight response.  Symptoms.   Patient’s subjective description of a physical or mental disorder.  Synapse.   Site of communication from the axon of one neuron to the dendrites or cell body of another neuron—a tiny filled space between neurons.  Syndrome.   Group or pattern of symptoms that occur together in a disorder and represent the typical picture of the disorder.  System.   Assemblage of interdependent parts, living or nonliving.  Systematic desensitization.   Behavior therapy technique for extinguishing maladaptive anxi- ety responses by teaching a person to relax or behave, while in the presence of the anxiety- producing stimulus, in some other way that is inconsistent with anxiety.  T  Tachycardia.   Rapid heartbeat.  Tactual hallucinations.   Hallucinations involving the sense of touch.  Tarantism.   Dancing mania that occurred in Italy in the thirteenth century.  Tarasoff decision.   Ruling by a California court (1974) that a therapist has a duty to warn a prospective victim of an explicit threat expressed by a client in therapy.  Tardive dyskinesia.   Neurological disorder result- ing from excessive use of antipsychotic drugs. Side effects can occur months to years after treatment has been initiated or has stopped. The symptoms involve involuntary movements of the tongue, lips, jaw, and extremities.  Task-oriented response.   Making changes in one’s self, one’s surroundings, or both, depending on the situation.  Tay-Sachs disease.   Genetic disorder of lipid metabolism usually resulting in death by age 3.  T-cell.   A type of white blood cell that, when acti- vated, can recognize specific antigens. T-cells play an important role in the immune system.  Telepathy.   Communication from one person to another without use of any known sense organs.  Temperament.   Pattern of emotional and arousal responses and characteristic ways of self- regulation that are considered to be primarily hereditary or constitutional.  Temporal lobe.   Portion of the cerebrum located in front of the occipital lobe and separated from the frontal and parietal lobes by the fissure of Sylvius.  Tension.   Condition arising from the mobilization of psychobiological resources to meet a threat; physically, involves an increase in muscle tone and other emergency changes; psychologically, is characterized by feelings of strain, uneasiness, and anxiety.  Tertiary prevention.   Older term for preventive techniques focused on reducing long-term consequences of disorders or serious problems. See   Indicated prevention .  Test validity.   Degree to which a test actually measures what it was designed to measure.  Testes.   Male reproductive glands or gonads.  Testosterone.   Male sex hormone.  Test-retest reliability.   Consistency with which a test measures a given trait on repeated admin- istrations of the test to given subjects.  Thematic Apperception Test (TAT).   Use of a series of simple pictures about which a subject is instructed to make up stories. Analysis of the stories gives a clinician clues about the person’s conflicts, traits, personality dynamics, and the like.  Therapeutic.   Pertaining to treatment or healing.  Therapeutic community.   Hospital environment used for therapeutic purposes.  Therapy.   Treatment; application of various treatment techniques.  Third variable problem.   Refers to the problem of making causal inferences in correlational research, where the correlation between two variables could be due to their shared correla- tion with an unmeasured third variable.
628   GLOSSARY  Thyroid.   Endocrine gland located in the neck that influences body metabolism, rate of physi- cal growth, and development of intelligence.  Thyroxin.   Hormone secreted by the thyroid glands.  Tic.   Persistent, intermittent muscle twitch or spasm, usually limited to a localized muscle group, often of the facial muscles.  Token economies.   Reinforcement techniques often used in hospital or institutional settings in which patients are rewarded for socially con- structive behaviors with tokens that can then be exchanged for desired objects or activities.  Tolerance.   Need for increased amounts of a substance to achieve the desired effects.  Tourette’s syndrome.   Extreme tic disorder involving uncontrollable multiple motor and vocal patterns.  Toxic.   Poisonous.  Toxicity.   Poisonous nature of a substance.  Traditional behavioral couple therapy.   Widely used form of therapy that uses behavioral approaches to bring about changes in the marital relationship.  Trait.   Characteristic of a person that can be observed or measured.  Trance.   Sleep-like state in which the range of consciousness is limited and voluntary activi- ties are suspended; a deep hypnotic state.  Tranquilizers.   Drugs used for reduction of psychotic symptoms (major tranquilizers) or reduction of anxiety and tension (minor tranquilizers).  Transference.   In psychodynamic therapy, a pro- cess whereby clients project onto the therapist attitudes and feelings that they have had for a parent or others close to them.  Transsexualism.   Individuals who identify with members of the opposite sex (as opposed to accep- tance of their own biological sex) and who strongly desire to (and often do) change their sex. In most cases this is gender identity disorder in adults.  Transvestic disorder.   Achievement of sexual arousal and satisfaction by dressing as a mem- ber of the opposite sex.  Trauma.   Severe psychological or physiological stressor.  Traumatic.   Pertaining to a wound or injury or to psychic shock.  Traumatic brain injury (TBI).   Brain damage resulting from motor vehicle crashes, bullets, or other objects entering the brain, and other severe impacts to the head.  Traumatic childhood abuse.   Mistreatment in childhood severe enough to cause psychologi- cal damage.  Treatment contract.   Explicit arrangement between a therapist and a client designed to bring about specific behavioral changes.  Tremor.   Repeated fine spastic movement.  Trichotillomania.   Chronic pulling out of one’s own hair.  Tricyclic antidepressants.   Medications used to treat depression, and sometimes anxiety disor- ders, that are thought to block the reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin at the synapse.  T-score distribution.   A standard distribution of scores that allows for a comparison of scores on a test by comparing scores with a group of known values.  Twin method.   The use of identical and non- identical twins to study genetic influences on abnormal behavior.  Type A behavior pattern.   Excessive competitive drive even when it is unnecessary, impatience or time urgency, and hostility.  Type D personality.   Type D (for distressed) per- sonality is characterized by high levels of negative emotions and social anxiety. Research suggests that Type D personality is linked to heart attacks.  Type I schizophrenia.   Psychotic behavior of the positive syndrome variety thought to involve chiefly temporolimbic brain structures.  Type II schizophrenia.   Psychotic behavior of the negative syndrome variety thought to involve chiefly frontal brain structures.  U  Unconscious.   In psychoanalytic theory, a major portion of the mind, which consists of a hid- den mass of instincts, impulses, and memories and is not easily available to conscious aware- ness, yet plays an important role in behavior.  Underarousal.   Inadequate physiological response to a given stimulus.  Undifferentiated schizophrenia.   See   Schizo- phrenia, undifferentiated type .  Undoing.   Ego-defense mechanism of atoning for or magically trying to dispel unacceptable desires or acts.  Unipolar depressive disorder.   Mood disorder in which a person experiences only depressive epi- sodes, as opposed to bipolar disorder, in which both manic and depressive episodes occur.  Universal intervention.   The tasks of altering conditions that cause or contribute to mental disorders (risk factors) and establishing condi- tions that foster positive mental health (protec- tive factors).  Unstructured assessment interviews.   Typically subjective interviews that do not follow a pre- determined set of questions. The beginning statements in the interview are usually general, and follow-up questions are tailored for each client. The content of the interview questions is influenced by the habits or theoretical views of the interviewer.  V  Vaginismus.   Involuntary spasm of the muscles at the entrance to the vagina that prevents penetration and sexual intercourse.  Validity.   Extent to which a measuring instru- ment actually measures what it purports to measure.  Variable.   Characteristic or property that may assume any one of a set of different qualities or quantities.  Vascular dementia.   A brain disorder in which a series of small strokes destroy neurons, leading to brain atrophy and behavioral impairments that are similar to Alzheimer’s disease.  Vasomotor.   Pertaining to the walls of the blood vessels.  Vegetative.   Withdrawn or deteriorated to the point of leading a passive, vegetable-like existence.  Verbal test.   Test in which a subject’s ability to understand and use words and concepts is important in making the required responses.  Vertigo.   Dizziness.  Virilism.   Accentuation of masculine secondary sex characteristics, especially in a woman or young boy, caused by hormonal imbalance.  Viscera.   Internal organs.  Voyeurism.   Achievement of sexual pleasure through clandestine “peeping,” usually watch- ing other people disrobe and/or engage in sexual activities.  Vulnerabilities.   Factors that render a person sus- ceptible to behaving abnormally.  W  Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC).   Standardized intelligence test for children.  Withdrawal.   Intellectual, emotional, or physical retreat.  Withdrawal symptoms.   Physical symptoms such as sweating, tremors, and tension that accom- pany abstinence from some drugs.  Word salad.   Jumbled or incoherent use of words by psychotic or disoriented individuals.  X  X chromosome.   Sex-determining chromosome; all female gametes contain X chromosomes, and if the fertilized ovum has also received an X chromosome from its father, it will be female.  XYY syndrome.   Chromosomal anomaly in males (presence of an extra Y chromosome) possibly related to impulsive behavior.  Y  Y chromosome.   Sex-determining chromo- some found in half of the total number of male gametes; its uniting with an X chromo- some provided by a female produces a male offspring.  Z  Zygote.   Fertilized egg cell formed by the union of male and female gametes.
